;«*»-.■ 


^^^^rwyf' 


i-iv*^' 


University  of  California  •  Berkeley 


:,^  //'/-     z^  yu/coccy^  L  ..^^^^  u  /occl. 


r^^  /C3^y 


)i- 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2011 


http://www.archive.org/details/reportsoflandcas01hoff 


REPORTS  OF  LAND  CASES 


DETERMINED  IN  THE 


UNITED  STATES  DISTRICT  COURT 


NORTHERN  DISTRICT  OF  CALIFORNIA. 


JUNE  TERM,  1853  TO  JUNE  TERM,  1858,  INCLUSIVE. 


OaE>E]>^    HOFFMAN, 


DISTRICT     JUDGE . 


VOLUME   I. 


SAN    FRANCISCO: 

NUMA   HUBERT,   PUBLISHER. 

1862. 


X 


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  Year  of  our  Lord,  1862,  by 

NUMA    HUBERT, 

In  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Court  of  the  United  States,  in  and  for  the  Northern 

District  of  the  State  of  California, 


TOWNE  &  BACON,  PRINTERS, 
IXOBLSIOK  orrioB, 

536  Clay  Street,  San  Francieco. 


S'lo^o  3 


PREFACE 


The  accompanying  volume  contains  all  the  opinions  delivered  by  the  Judge  of 
the  United  States  District  Court  for  the  Noi'thern  District  of  California,  in  land 
cases,  during  the  time  over  which  the  Reports  extend. 

They  were  obtained  by  the  Reporter,  with  the  Judge's  permission,  from  the  files, 
and  are  published  as  originally  prepared  and  delivered.  There  has  also  been  added 
a  list  of  the  Governors  of  California  from  its  first  settlement,  etc.,  together  with  a 
sketch  of  the  early  history  of  Upper  California. 

In  the  appendix  will  be  found  a  carefully  prepared  table  of  all  the  claims  pre- 
sented to  the  Board  of  Commissioners,  with  the  number  of  each  on  the  docket  of 
the  Commissioners,  and  of  the  District  Court  to  which  it  was  appealed,  and  the 
corresponding  number  on  the  index  of  Jimeno  ;  also  the  name  of  the  claimant,  of 
the  original  grantee,  the  date  of  the  grant,  and  the  name  of  the  Rancho  and  of  the 
Governor  who  granted  it,  the  quantity  claimed,  the  county  in  which  it  lies,  a  brief 
statement  of  the  proceedings  with  regard  to  it  before  the  Board,  the  District  and 
Supreme  Courts,  the  number  of  acres  when  surveyed,  whether  a  patent  has  been 
issued,  together  with  a  full  index  of  the  names  of  Ranchos  and  of  Claimants. 

It  is  hoped  the  volume  will  be  found  useful  to  the  Profession. 

N.  HUBERT. 


TABLE  OF  CASES  REPORTED, 


United  States  vs.  Alvisu 176 

vs.  Amador 76 

ads.  Armijo 248 

vs.  Bale 92 

vs,  Bassett 112 

ads.  Bennitz 104 

vs.  Bennett , 281 

vs.  Bernal,  Carmen  S.  de 99  >• 

vs.  Bernal,  Agustin 139  ' 

vs.  Bernal,  Heirs  of  Jose  Cornelio 50 

vs.  Berreyesa 99 

vs.  Boggs 109 

ads.  Brackett 85 

vs.  Briones Ill 

vs.  Cambuston .'. .  86 

vs.  Carrillo 96 

vs.  Castro,  Joaquin 105 

vs.  Castro,  Rufina 125 

ads.  Castro,  Salvador 72 

vs.  Cazares 90 

ads.  ChaboUa 130 

vs.  Ghana 155 

vs.  Cooper 101 

vs.  Cruz  Cervantes 9 

ads.  Dana 87 

ads.  De  Zaldo 98 

vs.  Enright 239 

vs.  Estudillo 204 

ads.  Feliz „ 69 

ads.  Fitch 272 

vs.  Fossat 211 


VI  TABLE    OF    CASES. 

United    States    vs.  Fossat 376 

vs.  Fossat 373 

vs.  Fremont 20 

ads.  Garcia 157 

vs.  Greer 72 

ads.  Grimes 107 

vs.  Grimes 137 

vs.  Guerrero 94 

vs.  Hartnell 207 

vs.  Howell 78 

ads.  Iturbide 273 

vs.  Larkin,  T.  0 41 

vs.  Larkin,   Francisco 75 

ads.  Larkin,  T.  0 313 

vs.  Leese ' 124 

vs.  Limantour 389 

ads.  Little 325 

ads.  Luco 345 

ads.  Marsh 301 

ads.  Martin 146 

ads.  McKee 173 

ads.  Mesa 66 

vs.  Moraga 103 

vs.  Murphy,  Bernard 77 

vs.  Murphy,  Bernard 81 

vs.  Murphy,  James 154 

ads.  Noe 162 

ads.  Noe' 242 

ads.  Nunez 191 

vs.  Ortega 135 

vs.  Oslo 100 

vs.  Pacheco,  Salvio 79 

ads.  Pacheco,  Juan  P 113 

vs.  Pacheco,  Eosa 150 

vs.  Page 80 

ads.  Palmer 216 

ads.  Palmer 227 

ads.  Palmer 249 

vs.  Palomares 97 

A^s.  Payson 138 

vs.  Peralta 89 

ads.  Pico,  Andres 116 

ads.  Pico,  Antonio  Maria 142 

vs.  Pico,  Antonio  Maria 172 

ads.  Pico,  Andres 188 

ads.  Pico,  Francisco 279 


TABLE    OF    CASES.  Vll 

United   States   vs.  Polaek 284 

vs.  Pope 141 

vs.  Reading 18 

vs.  Redman 305 

vs.  Reid,  Heirs  of  Juan 74 

vs.  Reid,  Samuel  G 129 

vs.  Rico 161 

vs.  Rodriguez,  Maria  G.  C.  de 82 

vs.  Rodriguez,  Manuel 170 

ads.  Rodriguez,  Ramon 175 

ads.  Romero 219 

vs.  Rose 197 

vs.  Sanchez 133 

vs.  Semple 37 

vs.  Sheldon 171 

vs.  Soto,  Josefa : . . .  68 

vs.  Soto,  Theodora 177 

vs.  Soto,  Barbara 182 

vs.  Stevenson 156 

vs.  Sunol 74 

vs.  Sunol 110 

vs.  Swat 230 

vs.  Teschemacher 28 

vs.  Thomes,  Robert  H 82 

vs.  Thomes,  Albert  G 83 

vs.  Thompson 79 

ads.  Thurn 298 

ads.  Vallejo 174 

vs.  Weber 126 

vs.  Wilson 84 

ads.  Yount 43 

vs.  Yount 49 

ads.  Yturbide 273 


REPORTS  OF  LAND  CASES 

DETERMINED  IN  THE 

UNITED  STATES  DISTRICT  COURT, 

NORTHERN    DISTRICT   OF   CALIFORNIA. 
JUNE    TERM,    1853. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  CRUZ  CERVAN- 
TES, CLAIMING  THE  RaNCHO  OF  SaN  JoAQUIN  OR  RoSA 
MORADA. 

To  constitute  a  definitively  valid  or  complete  title  two  things  are  necessary — first, 
a  concession  by  the  Governor ;  and  secondly,  the  approval  by  the  Territorial 
Deputation,  or,  in  the  event  of  their  refusal,  by  the  Supreme  Government. 

Where  the  condition  of  a  grant,  which  had  not  been  approved  by  the  Deputation, 
required  a  house  to  be  built  and  the  land  cultivated  within  one  year  from  its 
date,  and  no  house  was  built  or  cultivation  made  within  six  years  :  Held,  that 
the  claimant  had,  under  the  rules  of  decision  laid  down  by  the  Supreme  Court, 
no  equities  which  entitled  him  to  a  confirmation. 

Claim  for  a  tract  of  land  within  boundaries  supposed  to  con- 
tain two  sitios  of  ganado  mayor,  granted  to  appellee  on  the  first  of 
April,  1836,  by  Nicolas  Gutierrez,  Superior  Political  Chief,  ad 
interim^  of  California.  The  claim  was  confirmed  by  the  Board  of 
Land  Commissioners.     The  United  States  appealed. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  District  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Jones  &  Strode,  Attorneys  for  Appellee. 
2 


10  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


United  States  v.  Cruz  Cervantes. 


Hoffman,  J. — This  case  comes  up  on  appeal  from  the  decree  of 
the  Board  of  Commissioners  to  ascertain  and  settle  private  land 
claims  in  California.  Could  I  have  consulted  mj  inclinations,  I 
should  have  refrained  from  expressing  opinions  upon  any  of  these 
cases,  and  would  willingly  have  contented  myself  with  affirming  pro 
forma  every  decision  of  either  the  former  or  the  present  Board,  and 
remitted  the  case  to  that  tribunal  by  whose  decisions  alone  these 
questions  will  be  finally  determined.  But  I  have  not  felt  at  liberty 
to  shrink  from  this  part  of  the  duties  imposed  by  law  upon  this 
Court,  nor  to  withhold  the  expression  of  its  opinions,  however  im- 
material, as  regards  the  final  results,  its  decisions  may  be.  If  these 
opinions  shall,  on  some  points,  difter  from  the  conclusions  to  which 
the  Board  of  Commissioners  has  in  this  case  arrived,  it  is  with  the 
full  knowledge  that  their  opportunities  for  examination  and  consid- 
eration have  been  far  greater  than  my  own,  and  that  in  dissenting 
from  them  I  may  fall  into  error.  Were  the  consequences  of  my 
decision  more  serious,  it  would  not  be  without  great  regret  that  I 
should  find  myself  led  to  a  conclusion  diifering  in  any  respect  from 
the  opinions  of  so  able  and  learned  a  tribunal. 

By  the  fifth  article  of  the  rules  and  regulations  of  November 
21st,  1828,  prescribed  by  the  General  Government,  in  pursuance 
of  the  sixteenth  article  of  the  general  Colonization  Law  of  1824,  it 
is  provided  ''  that  grants  to  private  persons  or  families  shall  not  be 
held  to  be  definitely  valid  without  the  previous  consent  of  the  Ter- 
ritorial Deputation,  to  which  end  the  respective  expedientes  shall 
be  forwarded  to  it." 

In  this  case,  no  approval  of  the  Territorial  Deputation  is  shown. 

It  is  clear,  from  the  very  terms  of  the  law,  that  to  constitute 
a  "  definitively  valid  "  or  complete  title,  two  things  were  necessary, 
— first,  a  concession  by  the  Governor;  and  secondly,  the  approval 
by  the  Territorial  Deputation,  or,  in  the  event  of  their  refusal,  by 
the  Supreme  Government. 

It  is  contended  that  the  original  grant  or  concession  by  the  Gov- 
ernor passed  a  perfect  title  or  estate  in  fee  to  the  claimant,  subject 
only  to  the  condition  that  it  might  be  annulled  by  the  refusal  of 
both  the  Territorial  Deputation  and  the  Supreme  Government  to 
confirm  it. 


JUNE  TERM,  1853.  11 

United  States  v.  Cruz  Cervantes. 

I  have  been  unable,  after  much  consideration,  to  assent  to  this 
construction  of  the  regulations  of  1828. 

The  concession  does  not,  on  its  face,  purport  to  be  an  absolute 
grant ;  for  the  land  is  declared  to  be  "  the  property  of  the  peti- 
tioner, subject  to  the  approval  of  the  Deputation."  The  right  of 
granting  being  by  law  vested  in  the  Governor,  with  the  approval  of 
the  Deputation,  or,  in  case  of  their  refusal,  that  of  the  Supreme 
Government,  I  do  not  perceive  how,  without  such  approval,  the 
complete  title  can  be  deemed  to  have  passed. 

If  the  refusal  of  the  Deputation  is  considered  merely  a  condition 
subsequent,  which  on  its  happening  would  divest  a  fee  previously 
vested,  the  effect  attributed  to  it  is  precisely  that  of  the  other  con- 
ditions in  the  grant,  admitted  to  be  conditions  subsequent.  But 
these  conditions  operated  on  an  estate  supposed  to  have  become 
"  definitively  valid." 

Can  it  be  said  that  that  which  the  law  declares  necessary  to  the 
''  definitive  vaUdity  "  of  a  grant  is  identical  in  its  effect  with  a  con- 
dition which,  on  its  happening,  will  divest  an  estate  already  ''•  defini- 
tively z;a?Z6? .?  " 

That  the  grant  by  the  Governor  had  some  vaUdity  is  not  denied. 
It  was  the  performance  of  a  part,  perhaps  the  most  important  part, 
of  the  acts  necessary  to  complete  the  title ;  but  it  was  not  the  per- 
formance of  all,  nor  did  it  purport  to  be.  Until,  then,  either  the 
Territorial  Deputation  or  the  Supreme  Government  had  given  their 
approval,  the  grant  remained  not  '^  definitively  valid,"  or  in  other 
words,  inceptive  and  incomplete  ;  and  a  confirmation  and  patent  by 
the  United  States  are  necessary  to  pass  the  absolute  title  to  the 
claimant. 

Any  other  view  of  this  question  would,  it  seems  to  me,  deprive 
the  Deputation  of  the  important  functions  entrusted  to  them.  Their 
right  was  not  merely  a  qualified  right  to  take  from  a  petitioner  land 
already  absolutely  granted  to  him,  but  it  was  the  right  to  say 
whether  or  not  the  land  should  be  granted  to  him  at  all ;  and  until 
they  or  the  Supreme  Government  had  consented  to  the  grant,  the 
absolute  or  complete  title  cannot  be  deemed  to  have  passed  out  of 
the  Mexican  nation. 

The  title,  then,  of  the  claimant  being  found  to  be  inchoate  or  im- 


12  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Cruz  Cervantes. 

perfect,  his  right  to  a  confirmation  and  perfection  of  it  by  the  Gov- 
ernment of  the  United  States  must  be  tested  by  the  principles  laid 
down  in  similar  cases  by  the  Supreme  Court. 

Had  he  gone  on  to  perform  the  conditions,  and  confer  the  bene- 
fits on  the  Mexican  nation,  as  stipulated  for  in  his  grant,  no  objec- 
tion could  be  urged  why  this  Government,  succeeding,  as  it  does,  to 
all  the  rights  and  duties  of  Mexico,  should  not  perfect  his  title. 
That  the  settlement  and  cultivation  of  the  vacant  lands  of  the 
Republic  formed  the  sole  consideration  of  these  grants  is  not  dis- 
puted ;  and  in  this  particular  case  the  ability  of  the  petitioner  to 
render  this  equivalent  for  his  concession  seems  to  have  been  the 
subject  of  particular  investigation,  for  the  Governor  is  at  pains  to 
inform  himself  whether  or  not  the  petitioner  had,  as  he  alleged,  any 
stock  to  put  on  the  land,  or  the  means  of  getting  any. 

The  grant  bears  date  on  the  first  of  August,  1836 — and  is  made 
on  condition,  among  other  things,  that  the  petitioner  shall  within 
one  year,  at  farthest,  build  on  the  land  a  house,  which  shall  be  in- 
habited. 

It  is  subsequently  provided  that  should  he  contravene  these  con- 
ditions, "  he  shall  lose  his  right  to  the  land,  and  it  may  be  denounced 
by  another." 

The  juridical  possession  which  the  grant  directs  him  to  sohcit  of 
the  respective  Judge,  was  never  applied  for  until  the  year  1841 ; 
and  no  occupation  or  cultivation  of  the  land  by  him  is  distinctly 
shown  until  1846,  ten  years  after  the  grant.  The  Avitness  Godey 
testifies  that  in  1846  he  saw  the  claimant  residing  on  the  rancho ; 
and  adds,  that  the  house  he  lived  in  seemed  to  be  several  years 
old. 

Pacheco,  the  only  other  witness  on  this  point,  states  that  he  does 
not  exactly  recollect  the  time  when  the  claimant  began  to  reside  on 
his  rancho,  but  thinks  it  was  about  two  years  after  the  revolution  of 
Chico  and  Gutierrez. 

So  far,  then,  as  appears,  there  was  a  total  neglect  on  the  part  of 
the  claimant  to  comply  with  any  of  the  conditions  of  the  grant  for 
a  period  of  from  five  to  eight  years. 

If,  then,  we  are  right  in  regarding  the  title  he  has  received  only 
as  inchoate  or  imperfect,  the  necessary  authorities  not  having  con- 


JUNE  TERM,  1853.  13 

United  States  v.  Cruz  Cervantes. 

curred  in  making  the  grant,  the  inquiry  presents  itself,  has  he  a 
right  to  demand  of  the  United  States  that  they  should  go  on  and 
perfect  it  ? 

There  is  no  doubt  that  under  the  treaty,  as  well  as  by  the  laws 
of  nations,  such  title  as  the  claimant  had  acquired  when  the  sov- 
ereignty was  changed,  was  secured  to  him  as  private  property,  and 
the  question  is,  what  was  that  right,  according  to  the  laws  and 
usages  of  Mexico  at  the  time  of  the  cession  ? 

If  the  title  is  to  be  decreed,  and  a  patent  awarded,  it  must  be  on 
the  same  grounds  as  those  on  which  the  Mexican  authorities  would 
have  been  bound  to  decree  it  had  a  perfect  title  been  solicited  from 
them.  (^De  Villemont  vs.  The  United  States,  12  How.  267  ;  Glen 
vs.  The  United  States,  13  Id.  257.) 

The  rule  as  laid  down  in  The  United  States  vs.  Kingsley,  12 
Peters,  484,  is,  "  that  the  United  States  succeeds  to  all  those  equi- 
table obligations  which  we  are  to  suppose  would  have  influenced  the 
former  government  to  secure  to  its  citizens  their  property,  and 
which  would  have  been  applied  by  it  in  the  construction  of  a  condi- 
tional grant  to  make  it  absolute ;  and  further,  that  the  United 
States  must  maintain  a  right  of  property,  under  the  treaty,  by 
applying  to  it  the  laws  and  customs  by  which  those  rights  were 
secured  before  the  cession  of  the  country,  or  by  which  an  inchoate 
right  of  property  would,  by  laws  and  customs,  have  become  a  per- 
fect right." 

The  inquiry  is  not  so  much  what  would  the  Mexican  authorities, 
had  there  been  no  change  in  the  circumstances  of  the  country,  or  in 
their  pohcy,  have  in  point  of  fact  done,  as  what  they  were,  by  their 
laws  and  customs,  and  in  equity  and  good  conscience,  bound  to  do. 
Were  they  bound  to  confirm  and  perfect  the  title  of  this  claimant  ? 
or  were  they  at  liberty  to  consider  his  rights  as  abandoned  and  lost, 
and  refuse  to  accept,  after  so  long  a  delay,  his  performance  of  the 
conditions  of  his  concession,  and  treat  the  land  as  having  reverted 
to  the  public  domain,  to  be  disposed  of  as  present  circumstances 
or  policy  might  require  ? 

Grants  or  concessions  of  land  upon  condition  have  been  repeat- 
edly confirmed  by  the  Supreme  Court. 

It  will,  it  declares,  Hberally  construe  a  performance  of  conditions, 


14  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Cruz  Cervantes. 

precedent  or  subsequent,  in  such  grants  ;  nor  will  it  "  apply,  in  the 
construction  of  their  conditions,  the  rules  of  the  common  law.  (^Tlie 
United  States  vs.  Kingsley^  uhi  supra.') 

Thus,  where  the  full  performance  of  the  condition  must  have 
been  a  matter  of  indifference  as  well  to  the  King  of  Spain  as  to 
the  United  States,  after  the  cession  of  Florida — it  appearing  that  a 
performance  had  been  commenced  within  the  time  limited,  the 
grant  was  confirmed.  QArredondo^ s  case,  6  Peters.)  So,  when 
the  grantee  had  in  good  faith  began  to  build  his  mill  (which  was 
the  condition  of  his  grant) — expended  five  thousand  dollars  towards 
it — had  his  horses  and  negroes  stolen,  while  his  mill  was  being 
built — had  his  mill  dam  carried  away  by  a  freshet — rebuilt  his  mill 
in  1827,  which  was  destroyed  by  fire  the  same  year — and  the  year 
after  built  another,  of  seventy  horse  power — the  Court  determined 
that  the  claimant  had  shown  a  sufficient  performance  of  the  condi- 
tion, gy  pres — and  the  acts  he  had  done  amounted  to  a  comphance 
with  the  condition,  according  to  the  equitable  doctrines  governing 
such  cases.  On  the  other  hand,  where,  by  the  condition  of  the 
grant,  one  year  was  allowed  for  making  the  improvements  required 
by  the  regulations,  and  three  years  for  making  an  establishment  on 
the  premises,  and  the  claimant  never  took  possession  of  the  land 
until  long  after  the  cession  of  the  country,  the  Court  rejected  the 
claim,  disregarding  the  excuse  offered  by  him,  that  hostility  of  the 
Indians,  and  official  duties,  prevented  him  ;  and  observing  that  as  to 
the  first,  he  took  his  concession  subject  to  that  risk ;  and  as  to  the 
second,  that  he  held  his  office  when  the  concession  was  made,  and 
knew  its  duties.  The  Court  even  went  so  far  as  to  say,  with  refer- 
ence to  the  condition,  "  that  it  was  undoubtedly  necessary  that 
an  establishment  should  be  made  within  three  years — such  being 
the  requirement  of  the  concession,  in  concurrence  with  the  regula- 
tions." 

In  Boisdore^s  case,  the  consideration  of  the  grant  was,  that  a  stock 
farm  should  be  established  on  the  land  solicited,  and  that  such  an 
establishment  was  to  be  "  for  all  the  family  "  of  the  petitioner  ;  and 
on  it  he  was  to  employ  all  his  force  of  negroes.  The  evidence 
showed  an  occupation  of  the  land  for  forty  years ;  that  it  had  been 
cultivated,  to  some  extent,  from  the  date  of  the  grant,  and  that 


JUNE  TERM,  1853.  15 

United  States  v.  Cruz  Cervantes. 

stock  had  been  kept  there,  but  that  such  occupation  had  been  bj 
only  a  single  mulatto ;  and  that  the  petitioner  had  abandoned  the 
idea  of  taking  his  whole  family  to  the  place,  and  employing  all 
his  neirroej  there.  The  Court  considered  it  alto;2;ether  inadmissible 
that  such  trifling  occupation,  in  utter  neglect  of  Boisdore's  promises 
to  the  Spanish  authorities  and  the  duties  imposed  by  his  grant, 
fastened  an  equity  on  the  conscience  of  the  King  of  Spain  to  com- 
plete the  grant.  It  may  be  proper  to  remark,  however,  that  it  is 
stated  in  the  dissenting  opinion  of  Mr.  Justice  McLean,  that  the 
grant  was  rejected  by  the  majority  of  the  Court  for  want  of  cer- 
tainty in  its  calls.     (11  How.  63.) 

It  is  urged  with  much  earnestness  and  ability  by  the  counsel  for 
the  claimant,  that  the  only  penalty  attached  to  a  nonperformance  of 
the  conditions  of  the  grant  was  that  the  land  was  liable  to  be  de- 
nounced by  another — and  that  upon  such  denouncement  it  might 
have  been  regranted,  if  then  vacant ;  but  that  no  denouncement 
having  been  made,  nor  the  Mexican  authorities  availed  themselves 
in  any  way  of  their  fight  to  treat  the  land  as  having  reverted  to 
the  pubhc  domain,  and  the  petitioner  having  gone  on  to  perform 
the  conditions,  with  the  acquiescence  of  the  Government,  he 
ought  not  now  to  be  disturbed.  I  am  deeply  impressed  with  the 
force  of  these  considerations.  But  if  the  view  taken  of  the  effect 
of  the  absence  of  the  approval  of  the  Deputation  be  correct,  the 
land  cannot  be  deemed  to  have  been  at  any  time  finally  aUenated 
by  the  Mexican  authorities ;  and  the  question  is  not  whether  a  for- 
feiture should  be  insisted  on,  but  whether  the  United  States  are 
bound  to  complete  a  transfer  of  their  property  which  has  as  yet 
been  only  partially  made. 

It  cannot,  I  think,  be  denied  that  after  the  expiration  of  the 
year  from  the  date  of  the  grant,  and  up  to  the  time  when  the 
claimant  performed  the  conditions,  the  land,  by  Mexican  law  and 
usage,  might  have  been  denounced  and  regranted.  Such  was  the 
express  condition  of  the  grant.  But  that  condition  also  provides 
that  in  the  event  referred  to,  the  petitioner  shall  lose  his  right  to 
the  land.  Whether  or  not  in  the  case  of  a  complete  and  final 
grant  the  Mexican  Government  could  only  take  advantage  of  the 
forfeiture  by  the  process  of  "  denouncement,"  it  is  not  necessary  to 


16  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Cruz  Cervantes. 

inquire — for  this  is  not  a  complete  grant.  It  would  seem  far  more 
reasonable  to  suppose  that  it  could.  The  condition  provides  that 
the  petitioner  shall  "  lose  his  right  to  the  land  "  in  case  of  its  viola- 
tion. If,  upon  denouncement  of  the  land,  it  could  have  been  re- 
granted,  it  would  seem  that  the  Government  must  have  had  the 
right  to  make  any  other  disposition  of  it  which  any  change  in  their 
policy  or  circumstances  might  require.  Whether  such  regrant  or 
other  disposition  would  have  been  made  without  a  previous  inquisi- 
tion into  the  fact  of  forfeiture  is  not  very  clear. 

By  the  eleventh  article  of  the  regulations  of  1828,  it  is  pro- 
vided that  the  Governor  shall  designate  to  the  new  "•  poUador  ^''  a 
suitable  time  within  which  he  shall  occupy  and  cultivate  the  land 
under  the  conditions,  and  with  the  number  of  families  stipulated 
for,  with  the  understanding  that  if  he  shall  not  do  so  the  grant 
shall  be  null.  In  this  case,  at  least,  it  would  seem  that  the  title 
vested  in  the  Government  ipso  facto  on  the  happening  of  the  breach. 
But  the  inquiry  in  the  case  at  bar  is  immaterial,  for  the  full  title  has 
never  passed  out  of  the  Mexican  Government ;  and  the  question  is 
not  whether  the  United  States  acquired,  by  the  treaty,  a  right  to  en- 
force a  forfeiture,  but  whether  the  claimant  has  a  right  to  require 
this  Government  to  complete  his  title.  No  facts  appear  upon  the 
record  which  serve  to  explain  or  excuse  the  long  delay  of  the 
claimant ;  nor  is  there  any  very  distinct  proof  of  the  nature  of  the 
occupation  he  finally  took,  or  at  least  of  the  extent  of  the  cultiva- 
tion or  amount  of  expenditures  made  by  him  upon  the  land. 

Had  the  Mexican  Government,  at  the  date  of  the  cession  of  this 
country,  found  itself  in  the  precise  position  of  the  United  States, 
with  its  interests,  its  poUcy,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  country 
radically  changed,  it  is  more  than  doubtful  whether  it  would  or 
ought  to  have  felt  itself  bound  to  complete  this  grant,  as  the  United 
States  are  now  urged  to  do.  If  there  was  no  obligation  upon  them 
to  do  so,  and  they  were  at  liberty  to  refuse  or  comply,  we  are 
in  the  same  situation,  and  the  confirmation  of  this  title  must  be 
obtained  from  another  department  of  this  Government. 

Were  I  at  liberty  to  follow  bUndly  the  dictates  of  my  own  judg- 
ment, I  might,  perhaps,  have  confirmed  this  title.  But  governed 
as  I  am  bound  to  be  by  the  principles  established  by  the  Supreme 


JUNE  TERM,  1853.  17 


United  States  v.  Cruz  Cervantes. 


Court,  I  have  been  unable  to  resist  the  conviction  that  a  confirma- 
tion of  this  claim  would  be  a  departure  from  the  spirit,  if  not  the 
letter  of  the  rules  of  decision  laid  down  in  the  more  recent  cases. 
If  those  rules  are  hereafter  to  be  modified  or  departed  from,  it  must 
be  by  the  tribunal  by  which  they  were  established.  And  if,  in  this 
case,  the  equities  of  the  claimant  can  receive  at  its  hands  a  more 
liberal  construction  and  a  more  favorable  consideration  than  I  have 
felt  at  liberty  to  give  them,  no  one  will  acquiesce  in  the  result  more 
cheerfully  than  myself. 

Since  the  above  was  written,  I  have  been  informed  by  Senor 
Covarrubias,  an  intelligent  Mexican  gentleman  of  this  country,  that 
the  revolution  of  Chico  and  Gutierrez  occurred  in  the  year  1836. 
The  "  revolution  "  seems  to  have  been  one  of  those  transient  and 
slight  disturbances  so  common  in  this  country,  and  more  to  be 
likened  to  the  outbreak  of  a  mob  or  a  riot  in  a  city  than  one  of 
those  historical  events  of  which  judicial  notice  could  be  taken. 
But  assuming  that  the  Court  is  judicially  informed  of  the  date  of 
its  occurrence,  the  claimant  has  still,  under  Pacheco's  testimony, 
failed  to  comply  with  the  conditions  of  his  grant  for  more  than  one 
year  after  the  expiration  of  the  term  limited  for  their  performance ; 
nor  does  he  prove,  allege,  or  pretend  the  slightest  excuse  for  so 
doing. 

But  the  testimony  of  Pacheco  is  inconclusive.  That  witness 
says  he  does  not  exactly  recollect  the  time  when  claimant  com- 
menced residing  on  his  rancho,  but  believes  it  was  about  two  years 
after  the  revolution  of  Chico  and  Gutierrez. 

The  evidence,  however,  shows  that  judicial  possession  was  not 
applied  for  till  1841,  five  years  after  the  grant.  Pacheco  was  one 
of  the  assisting  witnesses  on  that  occasion,  and  he  does  not  say  that 
at  that  time  even  the  claimant  had  ever  built  a  house  or  cultivated 
the  land. 

If  the  witness  who,  in  1846,  saw  a  house  on  the  rancho  which 
seemed  to  be  "  several  years  old,"  is  to  be  beheved,  the  fair  infer- 
ence is  that  the  house  could  not  have  been  built  before  1842  or 
1843,  six  or  seven  years  after  the  grant. 

On  the  whole,  I  conclude  that  there  having  been  no  performance 
or  attempt  at  performance  until  long  after  the  expiration  of  the 


18  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Reading. 

term  limited,  and  no  excuse  being  suggested  or  pretended,  I  am 
not  at  liberty,  under  the  rulings  of  the  Supreme  Court,  to  confirm 
the  imperfect  title  of  the  claimant. 

Upon  the  other  questions  made  in  this  case  it  is  unnecessary  to 
express  an  opinion. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  v.  PEARSON  B.  READ- 
ING, CLAIMING  THE  RaNCHO  BuENA VENTURA. 

When  the  conditions  of  a  grant  have  been  performed  cy  pres,  though  no  approva 
has  been  given  by  the  Departmental  Assembly,  the  claim  is  entitled  to  con- 
firmation. 

Claim  for  a  tract  of  six  square  leagues  of  land  confirmed  by  the 
Board  of  Land  Commissioners,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  District  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

V.  E.  Howard,  for  Appellee. 

Hoffman,  J. — Two  objections  to  the  confirmation  of  this  claim 
are  urged  by  the  District  Attorney. 

1.  That  the  claimant  had  no  capacity  to  take,  being  a  foreigner. 

2.  That  -the  conditions  of  the  grant  have  not  been  substantially 
complied  with. 

First.  The  grant  itself  recites  that  the  claimant  was  a  natural- 
ized Mexican  citizen,  at  the  time  it  issued,  and  it  is  shown  that 
letters  of  naturalization  were,  in  fact,  issued  to  him.  No  fraud  in 
obtaining  them  is  pretended  to  have  been  committed  by  the  claim- 
ant. Whether  or  not  he  was  strictly  entitled  to  receive  them  by 
Mexican  law,  is  immaterial,  for  that  question  having  been  passed 
upon  by  Mexican  authority,  and  the  claimant  in  fact  naturalized, 
it  cannot  now  be  contended  that  he  was  not,  at  the  time  of  receiv- 
ing his  grant,  a  naturalized  Mexican  citizen. 

It  is  proper  to  observe  that  the  proofs  on  this  point  were  only 
furnished  after  the  District  Attorney  had  taken  his  objection. 

Second.  With  respect  to  the  performance  of  the  conditions, 
the  proof  shows  that  in  August,  1845,  less  than  one  year  after  the 


JUNE  TERM,  1853.  19 


United  States  i\  Reading. 


date  of  the  grant,  the  claimant  went  on  the  land,  took  possession, 
and  selected  a  site  for  his  house,  which  he  left  his  servant  to  build. 
It  was  completed  within  a  year,  and  inhabited  until  the  person  in 
charge  was  driven  out  by  hostile  Indians  and  the  house  burnt. 
A  crop  of  wheat  was  raised  on  the  land  in  1845,  and  another  in 
1846  ;  the  latter  was  burnt  with  the  house. 

During  the  year  1845,  Major  Reading  appears  to  have  been 
called  into  service  by  General  Sutter,  in  consequence  of  the  politi- 
cal disturbances  which  then  agitated  the  country.  In  1846,  he 
joined  the  Americans  under  Fremont,  and  continued  in  active  serv- 
ice during  the  greater  part  of  the  year.  In  1848,  he  returned 
to  his  rancho  and  has  ever  since  resided  on  and  cultivated  it. 

Under  these  circumstances,  we  look  in  vain  for  evidence  of  a 
willful  abandonment  of  his  grant,  or  even  a  neglect  to  perform  sub- 
stantially its  conditions.  The  object  of  the  Mexican  Government 
in  making  grants  undoubtedly  was  to  secure  the  cultivation  and 
settlement  of  their  vacant  lands,  and  that  object  was  attained  in 
this  case.  Even  if  the  conditions  of  the  grant  be  construed  to 
require  the  personal  residence  of  the  grantee  on  the  land,  the 
excuses  shown  by  him  for  his  omission  to  do  so,  are  such  as  should 
in  equity  be  received.  In  the  year  1845  he  was  unexpectedly 
called  upon  to  perform  public  duties  which  he  had  no  right  to 
decline  ;  and  the  reasons  for  his  neglect  in  1846,  are  certainly  such 
as  should  receive  the  favorable  consideration  of  this  Government. 

Had  no  effort  been  made  by  the  claimant  to  comply  with  the  con- 
ditions of  his  grant,  or  had  his  only  excuse  been  the  existence  of 
obstacles  which  equally  existed  and  were  known  to  him  when  he 
undertook  their  performance,  the  ruling  of  the  Supreme  Court  in 
the  case  of  the  United  States  v.  De  Villemont^  and  other  cases, 
would  have  compelled  me  to  reject  this  claim.  But  under  the  facts 
as  proved,  the  case  seems  clearly  within  the  principles  laid  down  in 
Sibbald's  case,  (10  Pet.  313). 

I  think,  therefore,  that  the  partial  performance  of  the  conditions 
of  this  case  within  the  time  limited,  and  the  excuses  offered  for  the 
absence  of  full  performance,  are  sufficient,  under  all  the  circum- 
stances, to  raise  an  equity  in  favor  of  the  claimant,  which  entitles 
•him  to  a  confirmation. 


20  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Fremont. 


THE   UNITED    STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  JOHN    C.  FRE- 
MONT, CLAIMING  THE  RaNCHO  OF  LaS  MaRIPOSAS. 

It  is  a  sufficient  severance  from  the  public  domain,  when  the  grant  itself  designates 
by  unmistakable  natural  boundaries  the  limits  of  the  district  within  which  it 
is  to  be  located,  and  where  the  particular  land  granted  is  specified  by  name. 

The  time  for  making  a  settlement  on  the  lands  granted  is  limited  to  one  year. 
The  danger  from  savages  before  and  after  the  grant,  is  no  excuse  for  not  com- 
plying with  that  condition. 

The  claim  was  for  ten  square  leagues  of  land  granted  to  Juan 
B.  Alvarado,  and  confirmed  by  the  Board  of  Land  Commissioners. 
The  United  States  appealed. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  District  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

V.  E.  Howard,  Jones  &  Strode,  and  Lockwood,  Tyler  & 
Wallace,  for  Appellee. 

This  case  came  up  on  appeal  from  the  Board  of  Commissioners 
for  ascertaining  and  setthng  the  private  land  claims  in  Cahfornia, 
by  whom  the  claim  of  the  petitioner  was  confirmed. 

The  title  of  the  claimant  is  derived  by  a  mesne  conveyance,  the 
execution  of  which  is  not  disputed,  from  Juan  B.  Alvarado. 

The  original  petition  of  Alvarado  upon  which  the  grant  issued, 
bears  date  February  22,  1844,  and  represents  that  being  desirous 
of  increasing  his  land  and  contributing  to  the  spreading  of  agricul- 
ture and  the  industry  of  the  country,  he  solicits  the  Governor, 
according  to  the  Colonization  laws,  to  grant  him  "  ten  leagues  of 
land  north  of  the  river  San  Joaquin  within  the  limits  of  the  Sierra 
Nevada  mountains,  in  the  same  direction  as  the  river  Chowchillas 
on  the  east,  that  of  the  Merced  on  the  west,  and  the  before  men- 
tioned San  Joaquin,  with  the  name  of  the  Mariposas."  He  also 
represents  that  he  is  unable  to  present  a  plan  or  draft  of  said  land, 
because  it  is  on  the  confines  of  the  wild  Indians  and  a  wilderness 
country. 

On  the  twenty-ninth  of  February,  1844,  the  grant  issued  subject 
to  the  approval  of  the  Departmental  Assembly  and  upon  the  usual  con- 
ditions.    The  land  granted  is  thus  described  :     "  The  tract  of  land 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1853.  21 

United  States  v.  Fremont. 

known  by  the  name  of  Mariposas,  to  the  extent  of  ten  square 
leagues,  within  the  limits  of  the  Sierra  Nevada,  and  the  rivers 
known  by  the  names  of  the  Chowchillas,  of  the  Merced,  and  the 
San  Joaquin." 

The  approval  of  the  Departmental  Assembly  was  not  obtained, 
nor  does  the  grant  appear  to  have  been  submitted  to  that  body. 
The  genuinenesss  of  the  grant  is  not  disputed. 

Among  the  conditions  of  the  grant  are  the  following : 

"  3d.  He  shall  solicit  from  the  proper  magistrate  the  juridical 
possession  of  the  same,  by  virtue  of  this  title,  by  whom  the 
boundaries  shall  be  marked  :  on  the  limits  of  which  he  (the  grantee) 
shall  place  the  proper  landmarks." 

"  5th.  The  tract  of  land  granted  is  ten  square  leagues  as  before 
mentioned.  The  magistrate  who  may  give  the  possession  shall 
cause  the  same  to  be  surveyed  according  to  the  ordinance,  the  sur- 
plus remaining  to  the  nation  for  the  proper  purposes." 

No  juridical  possession  was  ever  given  by  the  magistrate,  nor 
was  the  land  surveyed  during  the  existence  of  the  former  govern- 
ment. 

It  is  objected  by  the  District  Attorney  that  the  claim  cannot  be 
confirmed,  because  the  land  was  not  segregated  from  the  public 
domain  before  the  change  of  sovereignties.        *         *         *         * 


But  upon  the  assumption  that  the  cases  decided  under  the  act  of 
1824  apply  to  the  case  now  under  consideration,  the  inquiry  pre- 
sents itself  whether,  under  the  rules  of  decision  laid  down  by  the 
Supreme  Court,  this  claim  must  be  rejected  for  vagueness  of  bound- 
aries. The  land  is  described  in  the  grant  as  "  the  tract  know^n  by 
the  name  of  the  Mariposas,  to  the  extent  of  ten  square  leagues, 
within  the  limits  of  the  Sierra  Nevada  and  the  rivers  Chowchillas, 
Merced  and  San  Joaquin." 

The  district  of  the  country  embraced  by  these  exterior  bound- 
aries is  shown  to  contain  nearly  one  hundred  square  leagues. 

If  the  grant  ^contained  no  other  means  of  designating  on  what 
part  of  this  extensive  district  the  particular  ten  leagues  granted 


22  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Eremont. 

were  to  be  taken,  I  should  strongly  incline  to  the  opinion  that, 
under  the  decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court,  it  would  be  void  for  un- 
certainty. But  the  tract  granted  is  called  in  the  grant,  "  Las 
Mariposas."  If,  then,  within  the  general  exterior  limits  a  particu- 
lar tract  by  the  name  of  "  Mariposas  "  can  be  found  and  identified, 
that  tract  must  be  taken  to  be  the  subject  of  the  grant. 

From  the  testimony  taken,  it  appears  that  within  the  general 
limits  mentioned  in  the  grant  a  smaller  tract,  situated  on  the  Mari- 
posas creek,  is  well  known,  and  seems  to  have  been  understood  to 
be  the  tract  granted  to  Alvarado.  This  tract,  joining  the  valley  of 
the  Mariposas,  is  that  delineated  on  the  map  of  Pico,  which,  though 
merely  a  private  map,  and  made  from  memory,  yet  when  accom- 
panied by  a  survey  by  the  Surveyor  General,  made  in  con- 
formity with  it,  and  taken  in  connection  with  the  testimony,  shows 
that  there  is  a  tract  of  land  known  as  Las  Mariposas,  situated 
within  the  general  limits  of  the  grant,  and  capable  of  identification. 
The  valley  seems  to  be  easily  distinguishable,  being  narrow  and  shut 
in  by  high  and  barren  hills.  This,  General  Vallejo  swears  to  be  the 
tract  generally  known  to  have  been  granted  to  Alvarado. 

In  O'Hara's  case,  (85  Peters,  283)  the  Court  say :  "  The 
place  where  the  survey  is  to  be  made,  must  first  be  made  certain ; 
if  not  as  to  fixed  boundaries,  at  least  so  certainly  by  evidence  of 
general  or  popular  apprehension,  as  to  show  what  was  the  grantor's 
notion  of  the  limits  of  country  within  which  he  intended  to  grant." 
In  this  case,  not  only  are  the  general  limits  of  the  country  spe- 
cifically shown  by  the  exterior  boundaries  mentioned  in  the  grant, 
but  the  particular  part  is  designated.  In  the  case  of  the  United 
States  vs.  Clarke,  (8th  Peters,  467)  the  grant  was  for  "  five  miles 
square  of  land  on  the  west  side  of  St.  John's  river,  above  Black 
creek,  at  a  place  called  White  Spring,"  and  this  the  Supreme  Court 
held  valid  as  to  the  whole  land  within  its  limits,  as  well  that 
which  had  not  been  surveyed,  as  the  8000  acres  which  had.  I  do 
not  perceive  that  the  description  in  that  grant  was  more  specific 
than  that  under  consideration. 

In  Boisdore's  case,  (11  Howard,  86)  the  claim  was  rejected  for 
a  vagueness  of  description,  but  in  that  case  the  quantity  of  land 
was  not  designated,  and  the  uncertainty  of  the  boundaries  left  it 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1853.  23 

United   States  v.  Fremont. 

liable  to  be  enlarged  or  diminished  at  the  discretion  of  the  survey- 
ors.    In  the  case  at  bar,  the  quantity  of  land  granted  is  fixed. 

The  limits  of  the  district  within  which  it  is  to  be  located,  are 
designated  by  unmistakable  natural  boundaries,  and  the  particular 
land  granted  is  specified  by  name.  It  does  not  seem  to  me  that  in 
directing  a  survey  to  be  made  in  the  valley  of  the  Mariposas,  or 
in  adopting  that  already  made,  the  Court  would  be  exercising  the 
granting  power,  but  rather  be  determining  the  extent  and  locality 
of  land  already  severed  from  the  public  domain  by  the  grant  itself. 

The  other  objection  urged  by  the  District  Attorney  to  the  confirm- 
ation of  this  claim  is,  that  the  conditions  of  the  grant  have  not  been 
complied  with,  and  therefore  the  title  of  the  claimant  being  inchoate 
or  imperfect,  not  having  been  approved  by  the  Departmental  Assem- 
bly, no  equitable  obligation  rests  upon  the  United  States  to  perfect  it. 

In  the  case  of  Cruz  Cervantes,  it  was  considered  by  this  Court, 
that  the  only  solid  equity  which  the  claimant  under  an  unconfirmed 
grant  could  urge  upon  the  Government  was  the  filfillment  of  the 
conditions,  or  the  performance  of  those  acts  which,  under  the  Mex- 
ican system,  were  the  only  motives  and  considerations  for  the 
grant — and  that  w^hereas  in  that  case  the  conditions  had  been 
wholly  unperformed,  and  the  grant  apparently  abandoned  for  a  great 
number  of  years,  without  an  efibrt  or  an  excuse,  the  claimant 
could  not  appeal  to  the  justice  of  the  Government  to  confirm  his 
claim,  however  much  his  appUcation  might  commend  itself  to  its 
generosity.  In  the  case  of  Reading,  the  efforts  of  the  plaintiff  to 
perform,  and  his  excuses  for  his  failure  to  perform  completely,  were 
deemed  sufficient  to  entitle  him  to  a  confirmation  within  the  rule 
laid  down  in  Sibbald's  case,  to  which  it  seemed  most  analogous. 
The  facts  in  the  case  at  bar  are  as  follows :  The  grant  was  issued 
to  Alvarado  on  the  twenty-ninth  of  February,  18-14,  on  condition, 
among  other  things,  that  "  he  should  build  a  house  within  a  year, 
and  that  it  should  be  inhabited."  Immediately  on  receiving  his 
grant,  Alvarado  (as  appears  from  his  own  testimony)  applied  to  the 
Governor  for  a  military  force  to  enable  him  to  take  possession, 
reminding  him  of  the  fact  already  known  to  him,  that  the 
country  was  infested  with  hostile  Indians,  and  could  not  be  occupied 
except  with  the  aid  of  a  military  force.     The  Governor,  as  Alvara- 


24  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Fremont. 

rado  testifies,  offered  to  erase  the  conditions  from  the  grant,  but 
this  the  petitioner  dechned,  alleging  his  desire  and  intention  to 
occupy  and  cultivate  his  land.  The  Governor  then  agreed  to  fur- 
nish the  necessary  force,  and  a  military  post  was  soon  after 
established  on  the  San  Joaquin,  near  the  granted  land.  Owing 
to  the  depredations  of  the  Indians,  this  post  was  after  a  short  time 
abandoned.  Shortly  after  there  was  a  political  revolution,  and 
Gen.  Micheltorena's  affairs  becoming  embarrassed,  no  more  troops 
w^ere  sent.  This  occurred  during  the  year  184-J:.  Alvarado 
further  testifies,  that  in  August,  1845,  while  commander  at  Mon- 
terey, he  collected  the  cavalry  and  took  them  to  his  rancho,  near 
Monterey,  and  was  organizing  them  for  the  purpose  of  taking  pos- 
session, by  their  aid,  of  the  Mariposas.  While  thus  engaged,  he 
received  orders  from  Gen.  Castro  to  return  to  Monterey,  there 
being  rumors  of  war.  From  that  time  Alvarado  made  no  other 
attempts  to  take  possession — his  military  duties  occupying  all  his 
attention  during  the  war  which  immediately  ensued.  In  the  begin- 
ning of  1846  the  war  between  the  United  States  and  Mexico  broke 
out,  and  on  the  seventh  of  July  of  that  year,  the  American  flag 
was  hoisted  and  the  Mexican  authorities  deposed.  On  the  fourteenth 
of  February,  1847,  Alvarado  conveyed  to  Fremont,  the  present 
claimant.  On  receiving  his  conveyance,  Fremont  seems  to  have 
taken  some  measures  to  settle  and  cultivate  his  land,  but  being 
ordered  home  under  arrest,  he  employed  an  agent  to  go  upon  the 
land,  and  cultivate  and  inhabit  it.  That  agent  was,  by  Fremont's 
direction,  supplied  with  money,  agricultural  implements,  provisions, 
etc. ;  but  on  going  to  the  land  in  the  spring  of  1847,  found  the 
Indians  so  hostile  that  he  was  obliged  to  abandon  the  enterprise. 
The  same  agent  twice  visited  the  land  during  the  following  summer, 
but  found  the  Indians  so  hostile  that  he  was  unable  to  make  any 
settlement.  The  land  was  not  finally  settled  until  after  Fremont's 
return  from  the  United  States  in  1849.  But  since  that  time,  the 
claimant  has  erected  upon  it  numerous  valuable  improvements — 
consisting  of  dwelling  houses,  farm  houses,  machine  shops,  etc., 
and  is  now  in  possession  of  the  tract.  The  whole  testimony  leaves 
no  room  to  doubt  but  that  the  settlement  was  effected  at  as  early  a 
time  as  the  hostility  of  the  Indians,  and  the  circumstances  of  the 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1853.  25 

United  States  v.  Fremont. 

country  rendered  it  practicable  to  do  so  without  a  large  military 
force. 

It  is  urged  by  the  District  Attorney  that  hostility  of  the  Indians 
affords  no  excuse  for  nonfulfillment  of  the  condition,  and  in  support 
of  this  position,  the  case  of  De  Villemont  vs.  The  United  States, 
(13  Howard,  266)  is  relied  on. 

The  case  of  De  Villemont  bears  the  strongest  analogy  to  the  one 
under  consideration.  The  concession  was  granted  in  consideration 
of  the  petitioner's  intention  and  promise  to  estabhsh  a  stock  farm 
and  plantation.  It  was  made  under  the  express  condition  that  he 
should  make  the  regular  road  and  clearing,  within  the  peremptory 
term  of  one  year,  the  concession  to  be  null  if  at  the  precise  expira- 
tion of  three  years  the  land  should  not  be  established.  From  the 
date  of  the  grant,  until  the  delivery  of  Louisiana  to  the  United 
States,  he  had  completely  failed  to  comply  with  the  conditions. 

In  excuse,  he  showed  that  during  all  that  time  he  was  the  civil 
and  military  commandant  of  the  fort  of  Arkansas  ;  that  his  pres- 
ence there  was  constantly  required  by  the  threatening  aspect  of  the 
Indian  tribes  by  whom  he  was  surrounded  ;  and  his  correspondence 
with  the  Governor  showed  that  even  a  temporary  absence  from  his 
post  would  not  have  been  tolerated.  He  further  showed  that  the 
hostility  of  the  Indians  prevented  a  settlement  by  his  agents. 

It  was  also  established  by  proof,  that  the  common  usage  of  the 
Spanish  authorities  was  to  insert  the  conditions,  as  to  making  a 
settlement  and  a  road  within  a  given  time,  mechanically,  and  as 
mere  matter  of  form ;  that  no  land  was  ever  forfeited  under  the 
Spanish  Government  for  noncompliance  with  these  conditions ;  and 
the  testimony  on  this  point  was  confirmed  by  that  of  a  Judge  of  the 
Supreme  Court  of  Louisiana,  of  great  experience  and  reputation. 

It  further  appeared,  that  the  claimant  had,  as  in  this  case,  at- 
tempted to  make  a  settlement  by  an  agent,  but  the  hostihty  of  the 
Indians  prevented  it.  It  is  apparent  that  in  almost  every  particu- 
lar that  case  resembles  the  one  now  under  consideration. 

The  Court,  in  commenting  on  the  duty  of  performing  the  condi- 
tions, say  :  ''It  was  undoubtedly  necessary  that  an  establishment 
should  have  been  made  within  three  years — such  being  the  require- 
ments of  the  grant  in  concurrence  with  the  regulations."     The. 
3 


26  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Fremont. 

evidence  of  usage  in  that  case  was  at  least  as  strong  as  that  relied 
on  in  this ;  and  the  attempt  to  settle  seems  to  have  been  made  in 
that  case  as  in  this,  and  to  have  been  abortive  for  the  same  reason. 
The  Court  was  also  in  that  case  required  to  be  governed  in  its 
decisions  by  the  laws,  usages  and  customs  of  the  Goverment  under 
which  the  claim  originated.  But.  the  claim  was  rejected,  notwith- 
standing the  excuses  offered,  and  the  evidence  of  the  uniform  usage 
of  the  Spanish  authorities. 

Boisdore's  case  is,  if  possible,  stronger  ;  for  in  that  case  there 
was  a  partial  performance  of  the  conditions ;  but  the  Court  held 
that  inasmuch  as  the  claimant  had  stipulated  to  remove  his  family 
to  the  land,  and  take  there  all  his  force  of  negroes,  the  occupation 
by  a  single  mulatto,  by  whom  some  cattle  were  kept,  and  a  few 
acres  cleared,  was  wholly  insufficient.  With  respect  to  the  excuse 
that  the  state  of  the  country  and  Indian  hostihties  prevented  the 
settlement,  the  Supreme  Court  held  as  early  as  Kingsley^s  case  (12 
Pet.  483)  that  the  excuse  could  not  be  received,  if  the  same  obsta- 
cles existed  at  the  time  of  the  concession  ;  and  the  decision  in  De 
VillemonVs  case  but  reaffirmed  that  doctrine. 

The  case  of  Sibbald  (10  Pet.  313)  is  relied  on  by  the  counsel 
for  the  claimant,  as  furnishing  an  instance  analogous  to  that  in  this 
case,  of  a  good  performance  gy  pres. 

But  the  difference  between  the  cases  is  obvious.  The  grant  in 
that  case  was  on  condition  that  a  mill  should  be  established  ;  and 
it  declared,  "  that  until  the  petitioner  should  estabhsh  his  mill,  this 
grant  should  be  of  no  effect.  It  was  dated  in  1816,  but  no  spe- 
cific time  was  limited  by  the  decree  within  which  the  mill  was  to  be 
erected  and  put  in  operation. 

It  appeared  that  a  mill  was  built  in  1819,  and  carried  away  by 
a  freshet,  but  that  15000  had  been  expended  in  the  construction  ; 
that  in  1827,  another  mill  was  built  and  in  operation,  which  was 
destroyed  by  fire  in  1828  ;  that  in  October  of  1828,  another  was 
built,  which  went  into  operation  in  June,  1829,  and  had  ever  since 
so  continued.  The  Court  held  that  the  petitioner  had  begun  the 
erection  of  the  first  mill  in  time  to  save  a  forfeiture,  and  that  the 
other  acts  amounted  to  a  compliance  with  the  condition,  according  to 
the  rules  of  equity. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1853.  27 

United  States  v.  Fremont. 

But  in  the  case  at  bar,  the  time  for  making  the  settlement  is 
limited  to  one  year.  So  far  as  appears,  Alvarado  never  saw  the 
tract  he  assumed  to  convey  to  Fremont ;  nor  was  any  settlement 
effected  by  the  latter  until  a  year  after  the  ratification  of  the  treaty. 
It  cannot  be  urged  in  this  as  in  other  cases,  that  the  grant  was 
not  made  complete  by  the  assent  of  the  Assembly,  owing  to  acci- 
dent, or  the  neglect  of  the  Governor,  for  Alvarado  himself  says 
it  could  not  be  submitted  to  them  without  the  disefio  or  plan,  which 
on  account  of  the  hostilities  of  the  Indians  he  was  unable  to  furnish  ; 
and  yet  the  danger  from  that  source  existed  at  the  time  of  his  ap- 
plication, for  he  assigns  it  to  the  Governor  as  a  reason  why  the 
diseno  did  not  accompany  the  petition. 

It  is  urged  that  the  political  disturbances  of  the  country  con- 
tributed to  prevent  the  settlement.  But  I  think  it  clear  from  the 
evidence,  that  the  principal,  if  not  the  only  reason  why  it  was  not 
effected  by  Alvarado  or  Fremont,  until  after  the  treaty,  was  the 
danger  from  the  savages  ;  and  that  this  danger  existed  to  substanti- 
ally the  same  degree  before  and  after  the  grant. 

Upon  the  whole,  after  a  most  careful  consideration  of  this  case, 
and  with  every  desire  to  give  the  claimant  the  full  benefit  of  every 
favorable  consideration  to  which  he  is  entitled,  I  have  been  unable 
to  resist  the  conclusion  that  the  cases  of  Glen,  of  De  Yillemont  and 
of  Boisdore,  lay  down  for  me  rules  of  decision  applicable  to  this 
case,  and  from  which  I  am  not  at  liberty  to  depart. 


28  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


Teschemacher  v.  United  States. 


H.  F.  TESCHEMACHER,  et   al,  claiming   the   Rancho  of 
Lup  YoMi,  Appellants,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

Ordinary  grants  and  those  for  meritorious  services  are  governed  by  the  same 
principles  and  regulations. 

Appellants  claim  the  tract  of  land  known  as  Lup  Yomi,  in  Napa 
county,  alleged  to  contain  fourteen  leagues,  granted  by  Governor 
Manuel  Micheltorena,  on  the  fifth  of  September,  1844,  to  Salvador 
Vallejo  and  Juan  A.  Yallejo.  The  claim  was  rejected  by  the 
Board  of  Land  Commissioners. 

Thoenton  &  Williams,  for  Appellants. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  District  Attorney,  and  A.  Glassell, 
for  Appellees. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  session  of  this  Court  for  the  hear- 
ing of  appeals  from  the  Board  of  Land  Commissioners,  it  was 
stated  by  the  District  Attorney  that  a  question  of  great  importance 
would  arise,  the  determination  of  which  would  materially  aifect,  if 
not  control,  the  decision  of  a  large  majority  of  the  land  cases  now 
pending  in  this  Court. 

The  District  Attorney  having  stated  his  point,  the  Court  intimated 
its  willingness  to  hear  the  subject  fully  discussed  by  any  members 
of  the  bar  whose  cases  might  be  affected  by  the  determination  of 
the  question. 

Pursuant  to  this  invitation,  the  Court  has  been  favored  with  elab- 
orate and  learned  discussions,  which  have  occupied  its  attention 
during  several  days,  and  in  the  course  of  which  not  only  the  points 
raised  by  the  District  Attorney,  but  other  questions,  arising  out  of 
the  system  of  granting  land  formerly  prevaihng  in  this  country, 
have  been  fully  examined. 

As  to  many  of  these,  it  would  be  inexpedient  for  the  Court 
now  to  express  its  opinion.  Its  m.ore  immediate  duty  is  confined 
to  the  determination  of  the  points  raised  by  the  District  Attorney. 

When  the  opinion  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of  Fremont 
vs.    TJie  United.  States  was  first  promulgated  in  this  State,  it  was 


JUNE  TERM,  1855.  29 


Tcschcmacher  v.  United  States. 


generally  supposed  that  by  it  principles  were  determined  and  rules 
of  decision  established  applicable  to  all  the  ordinary  colonization 
grants  in  California. 

It  is  urged  by  the  District  Attorney  that  the  grant  to  Alvarado 
was  not  an  ordinary  colonization  grant,  or  at  least  that  his  title,  or 
that  of  his  assignee,  was  upheld  by  the  Court,  not  on  considerations 
applicable  to  colonization  grants  generally,  but  on  the  ground  that 
the  land  was  originally  granted  to  him  for  meritorious  services  ; 
that  the  principles  laid  down  by  the  Court  must  be  considered  as 
applicable  to  such  cases  alone ;  and  that  those  principles  are  still 
open  for  discussion  in  all  cases  which  in  this  particular  can  be  dis- 
tinguished from  that  of  Fremont. 

It  becomes  then  the  duty  of  this  Court,  not  to  seek  to  limit  the 
operation  of  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  by  subtle  and  un- 
substantial distinctions  between  the  case  decided  and  other  cases  to 
which  the  same  reasoning  may  apply,  but  to  inquire  whether  the 
decision  in  question  was  in  any  respect  founded  upon  the  distinction 
suggested,  and  whether  the  principles  laid  down  are  not,  by  the 
reasoning  by  which  they  are  supported  and  the  facts  to  which  they 
are  applied,  necessarily  applicable  to  all  similar  cases. 

But  one  passage  in  the  opinion  of  the  Court  in  the  case  of  Fre- 
mont has  been  cited  as  indicating  that  the  principles  determined  by 
the  Court  were  to  be  limited  in  their  application  to  cases  where  the 
grantee  had  rendered  meritorious  services  : 

''  The  grant  was  not  made  merely  to  carry  out  the  colonization 
poUcy  of  the  Government,  but  in  consideration  of  the  previous  pub- 
lic and  patriotic  services  of  the  grantee.  This  inducement  is  care- 
fully put  forth  in  the  title  papers ;  and  although  this  cannot  be 
regarded  as  a  money  consideration,  making  the  transaction  a  pur- 
chase from  the  Government,  yet  it  is  the  acknowledgment  of  a  just 
and  equitable  claim;  and  when  the  grant  was  made  on  that  con- 
sideration, the  title  in  a  Court  of  Equity  ought  to  be  as  firm  and 
valid  as  if  it  had  been  purchased  with  money  on  the  same  condi- 
tions." 

In  determining  whether  the  considerations  suggested  in  the  fore- 
going extract  were  the  true  grounds  of  the  decision  of  the  Court, 
it  will  be  necessary  to  consider  what  were  the  questions  presented 


30  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Teschemacher  v.  United  States. 

for  determination  in  that  case,  and  what  were  the  facts  of  the  case 
before  the  Court. 

The  objections  to  the  confirmation  of  the  claim  of  Fremont, 
which  chiefly  received  the  attention  of  the  Court,  were  two. 

1.  That  there  was  no  segregation  of  the  granted  land  from  the 
public  domain,  no  survey  having  been  made  or  juridical  possession 
given ;  and  that  the  description  of  the  grant  was  so  vague  and  un- 
certain that  nothing  passed  by  it. 

2.  That  the  conditions  of  the  grant  had  not  been  complied  with. 
With  respect  to  the  first  objection,  it  is  apparent  that  the  motives 

of  the  grantor,  or  the  consideration  on  which  the  grant  was  founded, 
in  no  respect  affect  it. 

It  recognizes,  or  does  not  deny,  the  right  of  the  claimant  to  ten 
leagues  of  land  somewhere  ;  but  it  is  based  on  the  ground  that  the 
Courts  have  no  power  to  grant  land,  or  decree  an  equivalent  for 
land,  that  cannot  be  identified,  and  that  until  its  identity  is  estab- 
lished so  as  to  enable  the  Court  to  ascertain  with  reasonable  cer- 
tainty where  it  lies,  the  land  remains  unsevered  from  the  public 
domain,  and  the  grant  cannot  be  confirmed. 

It  is  evident  that  this  objection  would  apply  with  equal  force  to 
all  grants  with  similar  descriptions,  and  would  be  equally  tenable, 
whatever  the  authority  by  which  the  grant  was  executed,  or  the 
considerations  on  which  it  was  founded. 

The  circumstance,  then,  that  Alvarado  was  deemed  worthy  to  be 
preferred  for  his  patriotic  services,  cannot  be  deemed  to  have  in- 
fluenced the  Court  in  determining  the  question  whether  anything 
passed  by  the  grant ;  and  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  must 
be  received  as  setthng  the  law,  not  only  in  the  case  of  Fremont, 
but  in  all  cases  of  grants  in  California  with  similar  descriptions. 

With  regard  to  the  second  objection,  viz  :  that  the  conditions  of 
the  grant  had  not  been  compUed  with,  the  distinction  taken  by  the 
District  Attorney  possesses  greater  plausibility.  For  if  the  inquiry 
be,  what  excuses  for  the  nonperformance  of  the  conditions  shall  be 
received,  it  might  be  contended  that  in  case  of  a  grant  founded  in 
part  on  the  consideration  of  previous  services,  the  Court  would  be 
less  rigorous  in  exacting  a  full  performance  than  in  cases  where  the 
performance  of  the  conditions  formed  the  sole  consideration  of  the 


JUNE  TERM,  1855.  31 

Teschemacher  v.  United  States. 

grant,  and  that  the  rules  laid  down  in  one  class  of  cases  could  not 
be  applied  to  the  other. 

But  the  reasoning  of  the  Court  in  the  case  of  Fremont  in  no 
respect  proceeds  upon  this  distinction. 

The  Court,  in  the  previous  part  of  its  opinion,  decides  that  the 
grant  to  Alvarado  vested  in  him  a  present  and  immediate  interest, 
and  that  the  conditions  attached  to  it  were  conditions  subsequent. 
It  then  proceeds  to  inquire  "  whether  anything  done,  or  omitted  to 
be  done,  by  him  during  the  existence  of  the  Mexican  Government 
in  California  forfeited  the  interest  he  had  acquired  and  revested  it 
in  the  Government." 

In  determining  this  question,  the  Court  observes  "  that  the  omis- 
sion to  perform  the  conditions  did  not  forfeit  the  grantee's  right. 
It  subjects  the  land  to  be  denounced  by  another,  but  the  conditions 
do  not  declare  the  land  to  be  forfeited  to  the  State  upon  the  fail- 
ure of  the  grantee  to  perform  them.  The  chief  object  of  these 
grants  was  to  colonize  and  settle  the  vacant  lands.  The  grants 
were  usually  made  for  that  purpose,  without  any  claim  of  the  grantee 
on  the  bounty  or  justice  of  the  Government.  But  the  public  had 
no  interest  in  forfeiting  them  in  these  cases,  unless  some  other  per- 
son was  ready  to  occupy  them,  and  thus  carry  out  the  policy  of 
extending  its  settlements.  As  between  the  grantee  and  the  Gov- 
ernment, there  is  nothing  in  the  language  of  the  conditions,  taking 
them  altogether,  which  would  justify  the  Court  in  declaring  the 
land  forfeited  to  the  Government,  where  no  other  person  sought  to 
appiopriate  them  and  their  performance  had  not  been  unreasonably 
delayed ;  nor  do  we  find  anything  in  the  practice  or  usages  of  the 
Mexican  tribunals,  so  far  as  we  can  ascertain  them,  that  would  lead 
to  a  contrary  conclusion." 

The  Court  then  proceeds  to  inquire  whether  there  had  been  any 
such  unreasonable  delay,  or  want  of  effort,  on  the  part  of  Alvarado 
to  fulfill  the  conditions,  as  would  authorize  the  presumption  that  he 
had  abandoned  his  claim  before  the  Mexican  power  ceased,  and  that 
he  was  now  endeavoring  to  resume  it  from  its  enhanced  value. 

It  is  apparent  from  the  foregoing  extracts  that  the  learned  Chief 
Justice  is  considering  the  effect  of  a  nonfulfillment  of  the  condi- 
tions, not  merely  in  cases  of  grants  made  on  consideration  of  pre- 


32  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Teschemacher  v.  United  States. 

vious  services,  but  also  in  those  made  "  without  any  claim  of  the 
grantee  on  the  bounty  or  justice  of  the  Government."  The  con- 
clusion arrived  at  is  founded  "  on  the  language  of  the  conditions, 
and  their  evident  object  and  policy,"  and  is  declared  to  be  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  practice  and  usages  of  the  Mexican  tribunals. 

That  "  the  Court  is  not  justified  in  declaring  the  lands  forfeited, 
where  no  other  person  has  sought  to  appropriate  them  and  the  per- 
formance of  the  conditions  has  not  been  unreasonably  delayed,"  must 
be  deemed  to  be  a  decision  applicable  to  all  cases  of  grants  in  Cal- 
ifornia, and  the  idea  that  it  relates  exclusively  to  grants  founded  in 
part  on  the  meritorious  services  of  the  grantee  must  be  rejected  as 
inadmissible. 

But  even  if  the  language  and  reasoning  of  the  Court  w^ere  less 
clear,  the  facts  in  the  case  of  Fremont  show  that  the  grant  to  Al- 
varado  can  in  no  respect  be  distinguished  from  the  ordinary  coloni- 
zation grants  made  in  California. 

By  reference  to  the  petition  of  Alvarado  to  the  Political  Chief, 
it  will  be  seen  that  he  solicits  the  land  ''  according  to  the  coloniza- 
tion laws."  The  Governor,  in  conformity  with  those  laws,  directs 
the  Secretary  to  report,  and  all  the  intermediate  steps  are  taken 
precisely  in  the  manner  required  by  the  laws  of  1824  and  the  reg- 
ulations of  1828. 

By  those  laws  the  Governor  was  authorized  to  concede  lands  to 
those  who  petitioned  for  them  with  the  object  of  "  cultivating  them 
or  living  on  them."  (Regulations  of  1828,  sec.  1.)  Nor  does 
he  seem  to  have  been  empowered  to  grant  on  any  other  condifeons 
or  considerations:  for  the  regulations  of  1828,  under  which  he 
acted,  give  to  the  Political  Chief  no  authority  to  make  grants  in 
reward  for  military  services. 

The  grant  when  issued  is  made  subject  to  the  approval  of  the 
Departmental  Assembly,  as  required  by  the  fifth  section  of  the 
regulations,  and  it  contains  all  the  conditions  and  only  those  re- 
quired by  the  policy  of  the  colonization  laws,  and  invariably  inserted 
in  the  colonization  grants.  That  both  the  Governor  and  the  grantee 
intended  this  grant  to  be  made  under  the  colonization  law  is  too 
clear  for  argument ;  and  it  is  abundantly  evident,  from  the  opinion 
of  the  Chief  Justice,  that  the  grant  was  considered  by  the  Supreme 


JUNE  TERM,  1855.  33 

Tcschemacher  v.  United  States. 

Court  as  made  under  those  laws,  and  bj  their  requirements  its  valid- 
ity was  tested. 

With  regard  to  the  reference  made  in  the  grant  to  the  meritori- 
ous services  of  the  petitioner,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  under  the 
colonization  laws  of  1824  and  the  regulations  of  1828  they  could 
not  have  formed  the  consideration  of  the  grant.  By  the  ninth 
section  of  the  law  of  1824,  it  was  enacted  that  in  the  distribution 
of  lands  preference  shall  be  given  to  Mexican  citizens,  but  "  between 
them  there  shall  be  no  distinction,  except  that  to  which  their  par- 
ticular merits  or  services  entitle  them."  The  meritorious  services 
of  the  applicant  are  therefore  under  the  law  regarded,  not  as  the 
consideration  of  the  grant,  but  merely  as  a  reason  why  his  applica- 
tion should  be  preferred  to  that  of  others.  But  in  his  case,  as  in 
that  of  an  ordinary  colonist,  the  motive  and  consideration  of  the 
grant  as  well  as  the  object  and  policy  of  the  law  were  the  cultiva- 
tion and  inhabitation  of  the  land.  In  strict  conformity  with  this 
provision  of  the  law,  the  Governor  in  his  grant  recites  that  Alva- 
rado,  "  for  his  patriotic  services,  is  worthy  to  be  preferred  in  his 
pretention  to  the  land,"  etc.,  and  he  then  proceeds  to  make  the 
grant  on  the  usual  conditions.  But  he  does  not  pretend  to  grant 
the  land  as  a  recompense  for  meritorious  services,  nor  from  any 
other  motive  than  to  carry  out  the  policy  and  effect  the  object  of 
the  colonization  laws,  under  which  he  was  acting  ;  and  for  this  pur- 
pose he  adds  to  his  grant  the  usual  conditions,  the  fulfillment  of 
which  is  the  only  consideration  for  the  grant  contemplated  by  the 
law. 

If  any  farther  argument  were  necessary  to  show  that  in  deciding 
the  case  of  Fremont,  the  Supreme  Court  has  laid  dow^n,  and  intended 
so  to  do,  principles  applicable  to  colonization  grants  in  California 
generally,  and  not  merely  to  the  particular  case  under  considera- 
tion, it  would  be  found  in  the  first  sentence  of  the  opinion  of  the 
Court. 

"  The  case,"  says  the  Court,  "  is  not  only  important  to  the  claim- 
ant and  the  public,  but  it  is  understood  that  many  claims  in  Cali- 
fornia depend  upon  the  same  principles,  and  will  in  effect  be  decided 
by  the  judgment  of  the  Court  in  this  case." 

In  the  face  of  such  a  declaration,  it  can,  we  think,  hardly  be 


34  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Teschemaclier  v.  United  States. 

contended  that  the  case  was  determmed  upon  pecuhar  and  excep- 
tional grounds. 

The  case  at  bar  remains  to  be  more  particularly  considered.  No 
oral  argument  upon  the  merits  of  the  case  was  had  at  the  hearing, 
but  it  was  stated  by  the  District  Attorney  that  the  only  objections 
to  the  validity  of  the  claim  on  which  he  relied,  were  those  con- 
tained in  the  opinion  of  the  Board  of  Land  Commissioners  reject- 
ing the  claim.  By  reference  to  that  opinion,  it  appears  that  the 
grounds  on  which  the  Board  rejected  the  claim  were  two. 

1.  That  the  conditions  had  not  been  performed. 

2.  That  the  locality  and  boundaries  are  not  given  with  sufficient 
definiteness  to  identify  the  premises. 

Without  stopping  to  consider  how  far  the  force  of  the  first  objec- 
tion is  affected  by  the  principles  decided  in  the  case  of  Fremont, 
it  is  sufficient  to  say  that  it  is  not  sustained  by  the  proofs. 

.  Since  the  decision  of  the  Board  was  rendered,  and  during  the 
pendency  of  the  case  in  this  Court,  additional  testimony  has  been 
taken,  which  establishes  beyond  question  the  fact  that  the  condi- 
tions of  cultivating  and  inhabiting  their  rancho  have  been  fully  com- 
pUed  with  by  the  grantees. 

The  grant  was  issued  on  the  fifth  of  September,  1844.  The 
land  had,  however,  previously  been  occupied  by  the  grantees  under 
a  permission  to  occupy  issued  by  the  Director  General  of  Coloniza- 
tion, and  dated  March  15th,  1839.  It  appears  that  the  rancho 
was  occupied  as  early  as  1842  or  1843  by  Juan  Antonio  Vallejo 
and  Salvador  Vallejo,  the  grantees,  who  put  upon  it  large  numbers 
of  horses  and  cattle  and  hogs ;  that  they  built  several  houses,  of 
which  the  last,  built  either  in  1844  or  1845,  was  an  adobe,  consist- 
ing of  two  rooms,  one  large  and  the  other  small,  and  that  corn, 
beans  and  watermelons  were  cultivated  on  the  rancho. 

Had  this  evidence  been  submitted  to  the  Board,  I  cannot  doubt 
but 'that  they  would  have  regarded  the  facts  of  cultivation  and  hab- 
itation as  satisfactorily  established. 

The  second  objection  urged  by  the  Board  is,  that  the  boundaries 
and  locality  of  the  granted  land  are  not  given  with  sufficient  defi- 
niteness. 

The  recital  in  the  grant  states  that  the  petitioner  has  solicited 


JUNE  TERM,  1855.  35 

Teschemacher  v.  United  States. 

the  land  known  by  the  name  of  "  La  Laguna  de  Lup  Yomi."  The 
grant  is  made  with  the  specification  "  that  the  land  of  which  dona- 
tion is  made  is  sixteen  leagues,  more  or  less,  as  shown  bj  the  re- 
spective map." 

A  map  of  the  land  described  in  the  grant  was  offered  in  evidence 
before  the  Board.  This  map  was  proved  by  the  testimony  of 
Salvador  Yallejo  to  be  a  faithful  representation  of  the  land ;  but 
he  was  unable  to  state  whether  or  not  it  was  the  same  that  was 
presented  to  the  Governor.  He  believed,  on  the  contrary,  that  the 
map  produced  was  one  made  by  himself,  while  that  presented  to  the 
Governor  was  made  from  it  by  Jasper  O'Farrell.  The  witness, 
however,  did  not  explicitly  state  that  CFarrell's  map  was  a  copy 
of  the  one  produced,  or  that  he  saw  O'Farrell  make  his  map,  or 
that  he  has  compared  the  two. 

Under  this  evidence,  it  was  decided  by  the  Board  that  it  did  not 
appear  that  the  map  offered  in  evidence  was  either  the  identical 
map  presented  to  the  Governor  or  a  copy  of  it,  and  that  the  descrip- 
tion in  the  grant  was  not  sufficient  in  the  absence  of  either  a  map 
or  a  juridical  measurement  and  deUvery  of  possession  to  describe 
and  locate  the  land  granted,  or  to  segregate  it  from  the  national 
domain.  To  remedy  this  defect  in  the  proofs,  additional  testimony 
has  been  taken  in  this  Court. 

By  the  testimony  of  Bedney  F.  Macdonald,  it  appears  that  the 
rancho  pointed  out  to  him  as  that  of  Lup  Yomi  can  be  readily  dis- 
tinguished by  great  natural  boundaries ;  "  that  there  are  only 
two  places  by  which  you  can  get  out  of  it,"  and  "  that  the  bound- 
aries all  around  are  high  mountains,  except  where  it  is  bounded  by 
the  creek  and  the  lake.  The  boundaries  are  natural  boundaries, 
and  cannot  well  be  mistaken."  The  witness  further  states  that  he 
made  a  map  of  the  tract  according  to  the  boundaries  as  pointed 
out  to  him  by  Salvador  Yallejo  and  Bamon  Carrillo. 

Salvador  Yallejo,  in  an  additional  deposition  taken  in  this  Court, 
states,  after  describing  the  land,  that  he  has  known  the  tract  since 
1840  or  1841,  and  that  it  has  been  called  by  the  name  of  ''  Lup 
Yomi"  ever  since  he  has  known  it;  that  it  has  natural  bound- 
aries, the  mountains  on  one  side,  and  the  lake  on  the  other ;  and 
that  the  boundaries  of  the  tract  are  the  same  as  those  pointed  out 


36  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Tescliemacher  v.  United  States. 

by  him  and  Carrillo  to  McDonald,  the  surveyor.  He  further  states 
that  after  the  grant  of  the  tract  to  him,  he  pointed  out  its  bound- 
aries to  seven  rancheros,  his  nearest  neighbors,  that  they  might 
know  it  and  recognize  it  as  his  property  ;  that  he  knew  what  those 
boundaries  were,  because  the  mountains  were  on  one  side  and  the 
lake  was  on  the  other ;  that  these  boundaries  were  the  same  as 
those  originally  designated  to  him  by  an  Indian  chief  named  Minac ; 
that  Lup  Yomi  in  the  Indian  language  means  "  town  of  stones," 
and  this  tract  was  so  named  by  the  Indians. 

Jos^  Ramon  Carrillo  testifies  to  substantially  the  same  facts. 
After  stating  the  boundaries  of  the  tract,  he  adds,  that  its  bound- 
aries are  natural,  consisting  of  the  lake,  the  mountains  and  the 
river ;  that  the  line  runs  at  the  base  of  the  mountains  ;  and  that 
he  has  known  it  by  the  name  of  "  Lup  Yomi"  since  1840.  He 
further  states,  that  Minac,  the  Indian  chief,  pointed  out  the  land 
described  by  him,  the  witness,  as  his  land — called  "  Lup  Yomi ;  " 
that  he  knows  of  no  other  land  called  by  that  name  ;  and  that  the 
adjoining  valleys  have  different  Indian  names — some  of  which  the 
witness  mentions. 

From  the  foregoing  testimony  we  think  it  clearly  appears  that 
the  description  in  the  grant  of  the  land  as  that  known  by  the  name 
of  "  La  Laguna  de  Lup  Yomi  "  is  sufficient  to  designate  its  local- 
ity ;  that  the  premises  are  identified,  and  the  land  severed  from  the 
public  domain  by  its  designation  under  a  name  which  is  shown  to 
be  that  under  which  it  was  well  known,  and  which  was  applied  to  a 
distinct  and  unmistakable  tract  of  land,  enclosed  within  great 
natural  boundaries  limiting  and  defining  its  extent. 

That  such  a  mode  of  designating  the  locality  of  the  granted  land 
is  at  least  as  satisfactory  as  that  furnished  by  the  designation  of  a 
point  of  commencement  for  a  survey,  we  think  obvious.  For  in 
this  case,  not  only  the  beginning  point  for  a  survey,  but  all  the  ex- 
terior boundaries  are  distinctly  indicated,  and  circumscribe  the  tract 
and  limit  the  quantity  of  the  land  with  such  precision,  that  it  has 
been  ascertained  on  a  survey  to  contain  only  twelve  leagues  instead 
of  sixteen,  the  quantity  mentioned  in  the  grant. 

No  other  reasons  for  rejecting  the  claim  than  those  we  have  been 
considering  are  contained  in  the  opinion  of  the  Board,  nor  has 


JUNE  TERM,  1855.  37 

Semple  v.  United  States. 

any  other  been  suggested  in  this  Court  bj  the  District  Attor- 
ney. 

Neither  the  genuineness  of  the  grant  nor  the  authority  of  the 
Governor  is  disputed. 

A  decree  confirming  the  claim  of  the  petition  must  therefore  be 
entered. 

It  will  be  perceived  from  the  foregoing  that  the  decree  in  this 
case  proceeds  on  the  ground  that  the  grantee  has  fully  complied 
with  the  conditions  of  his  grant,  and  that  the  description  of  the  land 
in  the  grant  is  abundantly  sufficient  to  ascertain  its  locality,  and  to 
effect  its  severance  from  the  public  domain. 

The  Cjuestion  discussed  in  the  first  part^of  this  opinion  might 
therefore,  with  more  propriety,  have  been  considered  in  some  other 
case  necessarily  requiring  its  determination.  But  the  importance 
of  the  question,  and  the  fact  that  it  was  elaborately  argued  at  the 
bar,  as  apphcable  to  this  case,  have  induced  us  to  take  this  occa- 
sion fully  to  express  our  views  upon  it. 


CHARLES   D.    SEMPLE,   claiming   the   Ranciio    Colus, 
Appellant,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

Under  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Fremont's  case,  this  claim  is  entitled 
to  confirmation. 

Claim  for  two  leagues  of  land  on  the  Sacramento  river,  rejected 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimant. 

Thornton  &  Williams,  for  Appellant. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  District  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  evidence  in  this  case  shows  that  on  the  twenty-eighth  of 
June,  1845,  John  Bidwell  petitioned  the  Governor  for  a  grant  of 
land.  After  the  usual  reference  for  information  and  reports  there- 
on, a  grant  was  issued  on  the  fourth  of  October,  1845,  by  the  Gov- 
ernor, Pio  Pico,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  Departmental  Assem- 
bly, which  approval  was  given  four  days  afterwards.  The  genuine- 
ness of  the  grant  is  not  disputed. 


38  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Semple  v.  United  States. 

The  land  solicited  is  described  in  the  petition  as  "  the  tract  of 
land  known  by  the  name  of  *  Colus,'  on  the  bank  of  the  river  Sac- 
ramento, which  tract  is  vacant,  and  contains  two  sitios,  bounded 
thus  :  on  the  north-west  by  vacant  land  ;  on  the  north-east  by  the 
river  Sacramento  ;  on  the  south  and  south-west  by  vacant  land,  as 
shown  by  the  drawing  annexed  to  this  petition." 

In  the  grant  the  land  granted  is  described  as  the  tract  of  land 
known  by  the  name  of  "  Colus,"  on  the  bank  of  the  river  Sacra- 
mento, to  the  north-east  direction. 

Under  the  evidence  submitted  to  the  Board,  this  claim  was 
rejected  for  want  of  definiteness  of  boundaries,  or  any  description 
sufficient  to  enable  a  surveyor  to  locate  it. 

It  was  considered  by  the  Board  "  that  the  only  thing  which  is  cer- 
tain in  this  description  is,  that  the  land  is  bounded  on  one  side  by 
the  Sacramento  river.  That  there  is  nothing  to  fix  the  place  along 
the  river  where  it  is  located,  or  to  identify  a  single  point  where  it 
touched  that  stream." 

It  was  further  considered  by  the  Board  that  this  defect  was 
unaided  by  the  map  which  accompanied  the  petition  and  forms  a 
part  of  the  expediente,  as  nothing  appeared  in  the  evidence  to 
show  why  the  lines  were  placed  in  the  position  they  occupy  on  the 
map,  or  how  they  are  to  be  found  by  a  surveyor.  "  They  are," 
say  the  Commissioners, "  mere  lines  on  paper,  having  no  monuments 
or  landmarks  to  indicate  the  locality.  The  three  sides  of  the 
tract  which  are  not  identical  with  the  Sacramento  river  have  no 
description  which  will  not  as  well  be  answered  by  a  line  drawn  in 
one  place  as  in  another  through  the  vacant  lands,  and  there  is  no 
description  which  fixes  the  front  on  any  specified  portion  of  the 
length  of  the  Sacramento." 

To  meet  the  objections  stated  in  the  above  extracts  from  the 
opinion  of  the  Commissioners,  additional  testimony  has  been  taken 
in  this  Court. 

By  the  evidence  of  John  Bidwell,  the  original  grantee,  it  appears 
that  the  original  of  the  map  contained  in  the  expediente  was  made 
by  him  in  1845,  and  presented  with  his  petition  to  the  Governor. 
That  there  is  a  very  noted  point  on  the  Sacramento  river,  being  a 
high  mound,  the  site  of  the  rancheria  "  Colus,"     The  northern 


JUNE  TERM,  1855.  39 

Semple  v.  United  States. 

boundary  begins  on  the  Sacramento  at  a  point  just  one  league  above 
said  "  Colus  "  rancheria,  and  runs  directly  back  from  the  river  at 
right  angles  with  its  general  course  one  league  —  thence  parallel 
with  the  general  course  of  the  said  river  and  down  said  river  so  far 
as  to  include  two  square  leagues  of  land.  The  tract  was  intended 
to  be  as  expressed  in  the  map,  two  leagues  long  and  one  wide. 
The  witness  adds,  that  with  the  aid  of  the  map  and  establishing  the 
beginning  point  as  stated,  he  or  any  other  surveyor  could  locate  it 
accurately. 

The  testimony  of  this  witness  is  confirmed  by  0.  M.  Wozencraft 
and  L.  B.  Mizner. 

The  former  of  these  witnesses  was,  in  1851,  United  States  Indian 
Commissioner,  and  as  such  acquired  full  knowledge  that  the  "  Colus" 
Indians  had  been  on  the  Rancho  de  Colus  a  very  great  number  of 
years. 

The  tribe,  which  is  the  only  one  of  that  name  in  California, 
inhabited  a  large  mound  or  rancheria  about  one  hundred  and  fifty 
yards  from  the  steamboat  landing  in  the  present  town  of  Colusa, 
between  six  and  eight  miles  from  the  Buttes,  in  a  west  by  north 
direction,  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Sacramento  river. 

These  Indians,  known  as  the  "  Colus  "  tribe,  were  still  inhabiting 
their  rancheria  on  the  mound  spoken  of,  as  late  as  1849,  as  appears 
from  the  testimony  of  L.  B.  Mizner. 

The  map,  which  forms  a  part  of  the  expediente,  indicates  the 
general  form  of  the  land  soHcited,  precisely  as  testified  by  the  wit- 
ness, Bidwell.  It  is  made  with  some  skill,  and  is  much  superior  to 
the  rude  delineations  which  accompany  most  of  the  Mexican 
expedientes. 

The  mound,  or  Rancheria  de  "  Colus,"  is  distinctly  indicated  on 
this  map,  and  in  a  position  entirely  corresponding  with  that  described 
in  the  testimony  of  the  witnesses,  as  appears  from  the  scale  attached 
to  the  map.  It  is  evident,  from  an  inspection  of  the' map,  that  if 
the  Rancheria  de  Colus  can  be  found,  a  surveyor  with  the  aid  of 
the  map  could  have  no  difficulty  in  locating  the  land.  That  the 
rancheria  and  the  mound  on  which  it  was  situated  can  be  found, 
the  testimony  leaves  no  room  to  doubt. 

We  think  that  the  objection  of  the  Commissioners,  that  there  are 


40  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Semple  v.  United  States. 

no  monuments  or  natural  landmarks  to  indicate  the  locality  of  the 
grant,  and  no  description  which  fixes  the  front  on  any  specified 
portion  of  the  length  of  the  Sacramento  river,  is  effectually  re- 
moved by  the  evidence  taken  in  this  Court. 

With  respect  to  the  performance  of  the  conditions,  it  appears 
that  when  the  grantee  first  received  his  grant,  in  October,  1845, 
he  intended  to  occupy  his  land  the  following  summer,  but  was  pre- 
vented from  doing  so  by  the  hostilities  which  began  in  1846, 
between  Mexico  and  the  United  States.  He,  however,  employed 
a  man  in  that  year  to  live  upon  his  land  and  take  charge  of  it,  but 
he  died  very  shortly  afterwards.  The  witness  served  in  the  Amer- 
ican army  during  the  war,  and  in  June,  1849,  immediately  after 
its  conclusion,  he  built  a  corral  upon  his  land  for  his  cattle.  In 
January,  1850,  he  conveyed  the  land  to  Semple,  the  present  claim- 
ant, who  immediately  took  possession  of  and  occupied  it. 

The  excuses  for  not  fulfilling  the  conditions  are,  it  will  be  seen, 
at  least  as  satisfactory  as  those  decided  in  the  case  of  Fremont  to 
be  sufficient.  In  this  case  there  has  been  no  unreasonable  delay, 
and  the  reasons  for  not  occupying  the  land  are  such  as  by  an  Amer- 
ican Court  should  be  received  with  favor.  There  is  no  pretense  to 
say  that  the  grant  was  abandoned,  for  the  grantee  seems  to  have 
commenced  the  improvement  of  his  land  as  soon  as  the  cessation  of 
hostiUties  permitted  him  to  do  so. 

It  is  to  be  observed  in  addition,  that  the  grant  in  this  case  was 
approved  by  the  Departmental  Assembly,  and  a  complete  title 
passed  to  the  grantee.  His  grant  was  thus  by  the  regulations  of 
1828,  definitively  valid,  and  the  Mexican  title  completely  divested. 
The  grant  in  the  case  of  Fremont  had  never  received  the  approval 
of  the  Departmental  Assembly.  Whether  in  any  case  of  a  grant 
made  definitively  valid  by  the  approval  of  the  Assembly,  this  Court 
can  decree  a  forfeiture  for  the  breach  of  conditions  subsequent,  it 
is  not  now  necessary  to  inquire  ;  for  the  right  of  the  claimant  is 
clear  on  the  principles  laid  down  in  the  last,  as  well  as  on  the  ear- 
lier decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court. 

No  other  objections  to  the  confirmation  of  this  claim  have  been 
brought  to  our  notice,  nor  do  any  others  occur  to  us  on  an  exami- 
nation of  the  record  in  the  case. 

A  decree  of  confirmation  must  therefore  be  entered. 


JUNE  TERM,  1855.  41 

United  States  v.  Larkin. 

THE    UNITED   STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  THOMAS   0. 

LARKIN  et  at..,  claiming  Jimeno's  Rancho. 

Under  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Fremont's  case,  this  claim  must 
be  confirmed. 

Claim  for  eleven  leagues  of  land  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Sacra- 
mento river,  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United 
States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

A.  C.  Whitcomb,  for  Appellees. 

In  this  case  the  claim  of  the  appellees  was  confirmed  by  the 
Board  of  Commissioners.  An  appeal  from  that  decision  was  taken 
to  this  Court.  But  the  case  has  been  submitted  by  the  District 
Attorney  without  the  statement  of  any  objection  to  the  validity  of 
the  claim  on  the  part  of  the  United  States. 

The  original  grant  by  Governor  Micheltorena  to  Manuel  Jimeno 
is  dated  in  November,  1844.  The  conveyance  to  the  present 
claimants  is  dated  August  30th,  1847. 

The  grant  is  fully  proved.  Nor  is  its  genuineness  called  in 
question. 

The  grant  appears  to  have  been  submitted  to  the  Departmental 
Assembly,  and  referred  to  a  Committee  on  vacant  lands,  June  3d, 
1846,  but  no  further  action  on  it  is  shown  to  have  been  had. 

The  expediente,  however,  was  returned  to  and  is  found  among 
the  government  archives.  Had  the  action  of  the  Assembly  been 
unfavorable,  the  Governor  should  have  transmitted  it  to  the 
Supreme  Government  for  its  resolution,  (Regulations  of  1828,  sec. 
6).  The  fact,  therefore,  that  the  expediente  was  not  so  trans- 
mitted, but  was  returned  like  other  approved  grants  to  the  archives, 
renders  it  highly  probable  that  the  approval  of  the  Assembly  was 
actually  obtained.  The  absence,  however,  of  that  approval  has 
been  held  by  the  Supreme  Court  to  be  no  obstacle  to  the  confirma- 
tion of  the  claim.  It  is  unnecessary,  therefore,  to  determine  whether 
the  evidence  in  this  case  is  sufficient  to  raise  the  presumption  that 
the  Assembly  actually  approved  the  grant. 
4 


42  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Larkin. 

The  land  claimed  by  the  appellees  is  described  in  the  original 
grant  as  "  the  tract  of  land  which  is  unoccupied  between  the 
Rancho  which  has  been  granted  to  the  children  of  Don  Tomas  0. 
Larkin,  the  river  Sacramento  and  the  uncultivated  lands  which  are 
on  the  side  of  the  south,  entirely  in  conformity  with  the  showing  in 
the  corresponding  plan.'' 

On  reference  to  the  plan  or  map  found  in  the  expediente,  we 
find  the  boundaries  of  the  tract  granted  laid  down  with  considera- 
ble precision.  The  first  or  northern  boundary  is  the  Rancho 
granted  to  the  children  of  Don  Tomas  0.  Larkin.  The  eastern 
boundary  is  the  Sacramento  river ;  the  southern  is  a  large  estero, 
(marked  on  the  map  "  lindero,"  or  boundary)  running  into  the 
Sacramento  about  two  leagues  above,  as  appears  by  the  scale  upon 
the  diseilo,  the  mouth  of  Feather  river.  Nothing  appears  on  the 
map  to  indicate  the  locahty  of  the  western  boundary.  That  bound- 
ary is  evidently  an  imaginary  line  running  parallel  with  the  Sacra- 
mento, and  as  far  distant  therefrom  in  a  westerly  direction  as  to 
embrace  within  the  tract  the  quantity  of  land  granted. 

There  is  no  difficulty,  therefore,  in  ascertaining  the  locality  of 
the  land  granted,  nor  has  any  objection  of  that  kind  been  raised. 

There  is  no  evidence  that  the  grantee  took  possession  of  his  land. 
The  grant,  however,  does  not  contain  the  usual  condition  of  culti- 
vation and  habituation  within  a  year.  The  omission  of  this  condi- 
tion may  possibly  have  been  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  grantee  was 
already  in  possession  of  the  land. 

It  appears,  however,  from  the  evidence,  that  from  the  latter  part 
of  1844  until  the  end  of  1847,  it  was  unsafe  to  go  into  the  valley 
of  the  Sacramento  valley  unless  in  the  vicinity  of  Capt.  Sutter's 
fort.  From  1844,  the  time  of  the  grant,  until  its  final  occupation 
by  the  American  forces,  the  country  was  distracted  by  the  wars 
between  Micheltorena  and  Pio  Pico,  and  between  the  latter  and 
Castro.  It  is  well  known  that  during  this  state  of  things  the 
uncivilized  Indians  became  more  turbulent,  and  were  dangerous  to 
the  frontier  settlements,  which  were  not  strong  enough  to  resist 
them.  In  1847  the  rancho  was  taken  possession  of  and  extensively 
stocked  by  the  present  claimants,  and  this  seems  to  have  been  the 
earliest  moment  when  the  settlement  could  have  been  effected. 


JUNE  TERM,  1855.  43 

Yount  V.  United  States. 

The  circumstances  in  this  case  are  almost  identical  with  those  in 
the  case  of  Fremont,  and  under  the  authority  of  that  case  the 
excuses  for  the  nonfulfillment  of  the  conditions  must  be  deemed 
sufficient.  There  is  nothing  in  the  case  from  which  an  abandon- 
ment of  the  grant  can  be  inferred. 

We  think,  therefore,  that  the  decision  of  the  Board  should  be 
affirmed,  and  the  claim  of  the  appellees  be  decreed  to  be  valid. 


GEORGE  C.  YOUNT,  claiming  the  Rancho  La  Jota,  Appel- 
lant, vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

Under  the  decision  of  the  United  States  Supreme  Court  in  Fremont's  case,  this 
claim  is  entitled  to  confirmation. 

Claim  for  one  league  of  land  in  Napa  county,  rejected  by  the 
Board,  and  appealed  by  claimant. 

Thornton  &  Williams,  for  Appellant. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

On  the  hearing  of  this  case,  no  oral  argument  on  its  merits  was 
had,  but  the  District  Attorney  stated  that  the  objections  to  its 
validity  on  which  he  should  rely  were  those  contained  in  the  opinion 
of  the  Board  of  Commissioners  rejecting  the  claim. 

To  meet  the  objections  stated  in  that  opinion,  additional  testimony 
has  been  taken  in  this  Court,  and  as  no  other  reasons  for  rejecting 
it  have  been  suggested  to  us,  we  have  now  to  inquire  whether  those 
objections  vv^ere  well  founded,  and  whether  they  have  been  since 
removed  by  the  additional  testimony  taken  in  this  Court. 

The  ground  on  which  the  claim  was  rejected  by  the  Commis- 
sioners, and  the  only  objection  mentioned  in  their  opinion,  is  that 
the  land  was  not  designated  in  the  original  grant  with  sufficient  cer- 
tainty to  effect  its  severance  from  the  pubhc  domain. 

No  juridical  possession  of  the  land  was  given — the  officer  whose 


44  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Yount  V.  United  States. 

duty  it  was  to  give  it  having  been  deterred  by  fear  of  the  Indians 
from  doing  so. 

It  appears  from  the  expediente  in  this  case  that  the  claimant 
made  his  petition  to  the  Governor  for  the  grant  on  September  14th, 
1843.  After  due  reference  of  the  same  for  information,  and  sev- 
eral reports  thereon,  Governor  Micheltorena,  on  the  twenty-first  of 
October,  1843,  made  his  order  for  a  concession,  and  on  the  twenty- 
third  of  the  same  month  issued  and  delivered  to  the  claimant  a 
grant,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  Departmental  Assembly,  and 
under  the  usual  conditions.  The  grant  duly  authenticated  is  given 
in  evidence  in  the  case,  and  its  genuineness  is  not  called  in  question. 

In  examining  the  nature  and  force  of  the  objection  to  the  validity 
of  the  claim  on  which  the  Commissioners  rejected  it,  it  will  be  neces- 
sary to-  extract  some  portions  of  the  opinion  of  the  Commissioners, 
as  the  same  appears  in  the  transcript  on  file  in  this  Court. 

''  The  petition  for  the  grant  alleges  that  the  petitioner  is  a  car- 
penter, and  there  being  in  the  mountains,  known  by  the  name  of 
'  La  Jota,'  a  vacant  place,  he  prays  His  Excellency  to  grant  him  a 
league  of  said  mountain  land  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  a  saw- 
mill therein.  Some  confusion  appears  in  the  subsequent  papers  in 
the  case  relative  to  the  application  of  the  name  La  Jota,  but  an 
examination  of  the  original  in  the  Spanish  language  makes  it  clear 
that  it  is  used  as  the  name  of  the  mountain  region  in  which  the 
land  solicited  was  located ;  and  the  above  is  all  the  description  of 
the  land  prayed  for  in  the  petition,  except  a  reference  to  some 
neighboring  ranches  bordering,  not  the  square  league  of  land  solic- 
ited, but  a  large  tract  of  broken  and  mountainous  country  within 
which  it  was  to  be  located,  and  from  which  it  was  proposed  to  sep- 
arate it  by  juridical  survey. 

*********** 

''  The  grant  recites  that  said  Yount  has  petitioned  for  an  addi- 
tion of  one  square  league  in  the  Sierra  next  to  his  rancho,  named 
'  La  Jota,'  and  proceeds  to  declare  as  follows  :  '  I  have  granted  him 

one  sc^uare  league  in  said  range  of  hills.' 

*********** 

"  The  land,  a  confirmation  of  which  is  asked  of  this  Board,  is 
denominated  in  the  application  to  this  commission  the  tract  of  land 


JUNE  TERM,  1855.  45 

Yount  V.  United  States. 

called  '  La  Jota.'  The  land  granted  is  nowhere  in  the  documentary 
evidence  emanating  from  the  former  government  designated  by 
that  name,  but  on  the  contrary,  seems,  by  the  tferins  used,  to  be 
excluded  from  the  place  thus  designated.  It  is  not  La  Jota  which 
is  granted,  but  lands  to  the  extent  of  one  league  which  adjoin  it — 
'  La  Jota.' " 

Under  the  view  of  the  facts  of  the  case  indicated  in  the  fore- 
going extracts,  the  Commissioners  rejected  the  claim,  regarding  it 
as  a  grant,  not  of  any  particular  piece  of  land,  but  of  an  unlocated 
quantity  of  land  to  be  afterwards  located  within  an  extensive  and 
undefined  tract  of  mountain  country. 

It  is  insisted,  however,  by  the  appellant,  that  this  conclusion  is 
founded  on  a  misconception  of  the  import  of  the  grant,  as  appears, 
not  only  from  the  terms  of  the  grant  itself  and  the  petition  on  which 
it  was  founded,  but  also  from  the  additional  testimony  taken  in  this 
Court. 

By  the  testimony  of  Elias  Barnett,  it  appears  that  the  tract  of 
land  claimed  by  the  appellant  was,  as  early  as  1843,  and  at  the 
time  of  the  grant,  well  known  under  the  name  of  "  La  Jota,"  both 
by  the  Mexicans  and  also  by  the  Indians,  by  whom  its  name  was 
originally  given  ;  that  the  witness  has  himself  known  the  tract  since 
1843,  and  that  ever  since  he  first  knew  it  it  was  called  by  the  name 
of  "  La  Jota  ;  "  that  it  is  a  piece  of  table  land  on  the  top  of  a  mount- 
ain, and  that  its  limits  and  extent  are  generally  known,  and  its 
boundaries  well  defined ;  that  a  Surveyor  could  have  no  difiiculty 
in  locating  it,  its  extent  being  a  little  less  than  a  square  league. 

Ralph  L.  Kilburn  testifies  that  he  has  known  the  tract  of  land 
called  "  La  Jota  "  since  the  winter  of  1843-44  ;  that  it  hes  on  the 
top  of  a  mountain  between  Napa  Valley  and  Pope's  Rancho,  and 
that  it  is  bounded  by  the  slope  of  the  mountain  on  every  side  ;  that 
it  contains  somewhat  less  than  a  league  of  land,  and  that  it  is  as 
easy  to  ascertain  its  boundaries  as  those  of  Goat  Island  in  this 
harbor. 

He  further  states  that  this  tract  is  generally  known  by  the  name 
of  "  La  Jota,"  and  that  it  was  so  known  before  he  became  acquaint- 
ed with  it. 

It  is  evident  from  this  testimony  and  the  other  depositions  in  the 


46  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Yount  V.  United  States. 

case,  that  there  is  in  the  vicinity  of  the  rancho  of  the  claimant 
called  Cajmas,  a  tract  of  land  of  well  defined  limits,  and  with  gen- 
erally recognized  boundaries ;  that  it  was  at  the  time  of  the  grant, 
and  previously,  known  under  the  name  of  La  Jota ;  that  it  was 
occupied  immediately  after  the  grant  by  the  claimants,  and  improve- 
ments were  made  upon  it ;  and  that  it  is  now  known  under  the 
name  of  La  Jota  and  recognized  as  the  land  granted  to  him. 

Nothing  appears  in  the  evidence  to  show  that  the  name  La  Jota 
was  ever  apphed  to  the  Sierra  or  mountain  range  in  which  the  tract 
was  situated,  or  that  that  name  was  ever  supposed  to  include  any 
other  land  than  the  well  defined  tract  of  about  a  league  square, 
now  claimed  by  the  appellant. 

Such  being  the  facts  of  the  case,  we  have  next  to  inquire  whether 
the  place  called  La  Jota  was  granted  to  the  claimant. 

The  Commissioners  seem  to  have  thought  that  the  name  of  La 
Jota  is  mentioned  in  the  grant  as  that  of  the  rancho  near  which  the 
granted  land  was  situated,  and  not  as  that  of  the  granted  land 
itself 

But  independently  of  the  fact  that  the  rancho  was  not  called  by 
the  name  of  La  Jota,  but  was  well  known  as  "  Cay  mas,"  a  close 
examination  of  the  grant  will  show  that  the  name  "  La  Jota  "  is 
applied,  not  to  the  neighboring  rancho  of  the  appellant,  but  to  the 
Sierra  or  Serrania  adjoining  it. 

The  original  grant  recites,  that  whereas  George  Yount,  etc.,  has 
applied  for  an  "  estencion  "  of  one  square  league  in  the  Sierra 
adjoining  his  rancho  named  "  La  Jota."  In  Enghsh  the  name  thus 
used  might  well  be  taken  for  that  of  the  rancho,  but  on  referring 
to  the  original  Spanish,  it  is  apparent  that  the  expression  nomhrada 
La  Jota,  in  the  feminine,  cannot  refer  to  the  masculine  antecedent 
rancho^  but  must  relate  to  the  feminine  sierra. 

The  land  granted  is  afterwards  described  as  one  square  league 
in  the  said  range  of  hills — "  serrania.''^ 

The  original  petition  on  which  the  grant  is  founded,  sets  forth 
"  that  there  being  vacant  ''  una  serrania  "  adjoining  the  rancho  of 
the  petitioner  "  conocicZ«  con  el  nombre  de  Jota,"  he  solicits  one 
square  league  of  said  sierra^  etc.,  etc. 

From  the  petition,  therefore,  as  well  as  from  the  grant,  it  appears 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  47 

Yomit  V.  United  States. 

that  the  land  granted  is  not  a  particular  place  known  as  "  La  Jota," 
but  one  square  league  in  the  "  Sierra,"  or  the  "  serrania,"  called 
"La  Jota." 

It  is  argued  by  the  counsel  for  the  claimants,  that  the  phrase  in 
the  recital  of  the  grant  "  nombrada  La  Jota  "  applies  to  the  "  esten- 
cion"  solicited.  But  whatever  ambiguity  there  might  have  been 
in  the  recital  of  the  grant,  it  is  removed  by  the  words  of  the  grant- 
ing clause,  which  describes  the  land  granted  as  one  "  square  league 
in  the  said  range  of  hills  "  or  mountain  ridge,  as  the  word  serrania 
might  with  equal  propriety  be  rendered.  The  petition,  too,  as  has 
been  stated,  after  reciting  that  there  is  vacant  a  "  serrania,"  called 
La  Jota,  adjoining  the  rancho  of  the  petitioner,  solicits,  not  the 
place  known  by  that  name,  but  a  square  league  of  said  "  sierra  " 
or  mountain  range. 

It  is  clear,  then,  that  the  grant  cannot  be  construed  as  convey- 
ing a  place  called  La  Jota,  but  as  granting  a  league  square  in  a 
mountain  ridge  of  that  name. 

The  true  facts  of  the  case  are,  we  think,  apparent. 

The  petitioner  undoubtedly  intended  to  ask  for,  and  probably  the 
Governor  intended  to  grant,  a  particular  piece  of  land  in  the  mount- 
ain near  his  rancho.  That  piece  of  land  was,  as  appears  by  the 
testimony,  well  known  and  had  determinate  boundaries  ;  that  it  was 
what  the  petitioner  asked  for,  is  evident  from  the  facts  that  its 
extent  is  exactly  one  square  league,  the  quantity  solicited ;  that 
he  immediately  took  possession  of  it  and  made  expensive  improve- 
ments upon  it ;  that  it  contained  pine  trees  to  furnish  timber  for  the 
saw-mill  he  proposed  to  erect ;  and  that  it  then  bore  and  has  ever 
since  retained  the  name  of  "  La  Jota." 

Unfortunately,  however,  he  does  not,  as  we  have  seen,  solicit  the 
place  called  La  Jota,  but  a  square  league  in  the  sierra  of  that  name, 
and  the  Governor  grants  him,  not  La  Jota,  but  a  square  league  in 
said  range  of  hills  "  en  dicha  serrania."  Is,  then,  this  grant  so 
vague  that  the  claim  of  the  petitioner  must  be  rejected  ? 

In  the  case  of  Fremont  vs.  The  United  States,  it  was  determ- 
ined that  the  claimant  had  a  vested  right  to  the  quantity  of  land 
named  in  the  grant  to  be  located  within  the  exterior  limits  men- 
tioned. Those  limits  embrace  a  region  of  country  containing  more 
than  one  hundred  square  leagues. 


48  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Yount  V.  United  States. 

In  the  case  before  us,  the  claimant's  right  is  to  one  square  league 
in  the  mountain  ridge  named  La  Jota,  adjoining  his  rancho.  The 
limits  within  which  the  grant  is  to  be  located  are  distinctly  indicated 
in  his  petition  by  boundaries,  for  it  is  stated  to  be  bounded  on  the 
south  by  the  rancho  of  Dr.  Bale  and  Napa,  on  the  east  by  that  of 
Las  Animas,  and  on  the  west  by  Las  Mallaimas. 

We  have,  then,  the  exterior  limits  or  boundaries  of  the  league 
granted,  as  well  as  the  name  of  the  mountain  ridge  on  which  it  was 
situated,  with  the  further  specification  that  it  (the  mountain  ridge) 
is  adjoining  (inmediata)  his  rancho  of  Caymas. 

That  this  description  conveyed  to  those  acquainted  with  ih^  coun- 
try an  accurate  notion  of  the  place  sohcited,  appears  from  the  report 
of  Vallejo,  to  whom  the  Governor  referred  for  information.  That 
report  speaks  of  "  the  piece  of  land  (el  terrene)  solicited  "  as  situ- 
ated north  of  Sonoma,  and  as  not  belonging  to  any  individual,  etc. 

We  think  the  description  in  the  grant,  and  the  other  facts  in  this 
case,  bring  it  fully  within  the  principles  of  the  case  of  Fremont  vs. 
The  United  States. 

No  other  objection  than  that  already  discussed  has  been  brought 
to  our  notice. 

It  appears  by  the  testimony  of  Jose  de  la  Rosa,  that  the  claimant 
has  occupied  the  land  by  "  building  a  house,  a  grist  and  saw-mill, 
living  on  the  land,  carrying  on  the  lumber  business,  farming  and 
stock  raising."     (Transcript,  p.  10.) 

The  claim  must  therefore  be  confirmed. 


JUNE  TERM,  1855.  49 

United  States  v.  Yount. 

THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  GEORGE  C. 
YOUNT,  CLAmiNG  the  Rancho  Caymas. 

The  validity  of  this  claim  was  not  disputed  by  the  District  Attorney. 

Claim  for  two  square  leagues  of  land  in  Napa  Valley,  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  and  appeared  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Thornton  &  Williams,  for  Appellee. 

No  objections  whatever  to  the  validity  of  this  claim  are  raised  by 
the  District  Attorney,  nor  is  any  reason  suggested  why  it  should  not 
be  confirmed. 

The  grant  bears  date  on  the  twenty-third  of  February,  1836, 
and  is  two  square  leagues  "  as  shown  on  the  map  which  goes  with 
the  expediente." 

The  land  was  accurately  measured  and  juridical  possession  was 
given  with  the  formalities  required  by  the  usage  of  the  country, 
and  a  copy  of  the  record  of  these  proceedings  on  file  among  the 
archives  of  land  titles  in  the  jurisdiction  of  Sonoma  district  is  found 
in  the  transcript  filed  in  this  Court. 

All  the  conditions  of 'the  grant  have  been  fully  performed,  and 
within  the  time  Umited,  and  ever  since  the  date  of  the  grant,  1836, 
the  claimant  has  continued  to  reside  on  his  land,  and  has  made 
extensive  and  valuable  improvements  upon  it. 

The  genuineness  of  the  grant  is  not  disputed,  and  almost  all 
the  facts  are  proved  by  authenticated  transcripts  from  the  public 
archives. 

We  are  unable,  on  an  examination  of  the  record,  to  discover  any 
objection  to  the  vahdity  of  this  claim. 

A  decree  of  confirmation  must  therefore  be  entered. 


50  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Bernal. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  THE  HEIRS  OF 
JOSE  CORNELIO  BERNAL,  claiming  the  Rancho  Rin- 

CON  DE  LAS  Salinas  y  Potrero  Viejo. 

■■?♦""  ■ 

The  allegations  of  fraud  not  being  proved  by  the  United  States,  the  claim  must 
be  confirmed. 

Claim  for  one  square  league  of  land  in  San  Francisco  county, 
confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 
Halleck,  Peachy  &  Billings,  for  Appellees. 

The  confirmation  of  this  claim  was  resisted  on  the  part  of  the 
United  States  on  the  ground  of  fraud.  The  Court  being  desirous 
that  the  fullest  opportunity  should  be  afforded  to  the  appellants  and 
the  numerous  parties  interested  in  defeating  this  claim  to  establish 
the  charge,  has  devoted  an  entire  week  to  its  investigation.  A  mass 
of  testimony  has  accordingly  been  taken,  but  it  is  for  the  most  part 
so  inconclusive,  irrelevant  and  conflicting  that  the  District  Attorney 
in  his  concluding  argument  forbore  to  allude  to  it,  and  based  his 
objections  to  the  confirmation  of  the  claim  almost  exclusively  upon 
the  suspicions  suggested  by  a  comparison  of -the  original  title  papers 
with  the  expediente  from  the  archives. 

A  brief  review  of  the  testimony  may  not,  however,  be  inappro- 
priate. 

The  claim  of  the  appellees  is  for  a  tract  of  land,  or  more  cor- 
rectly, perhaps,  for  two  tracts,  known  as  the  Rincon  de  las  Salinas 
and  the  Potrero  Viejo,  as  shown  by  the  map  accompanying  the 
expediente. 

In  support  of  this  claim,  the  appellees  have  offered  in  evidence 
the  original  documento  or  title  paper  issued  by  the  Governor  to  the 
party  interested  ;  a  map  certified  to  be  a  copy  of  that  which  accom- 
panies the  expediente,  and  a  certificate  of  the  approval  of  the  grant 
by  the  Departmental  Assembly. 

The  expediente  was  also  produced  by  the  United  States,  and  is 


JUNE  TERM,  1855.  51 

United  States  v.  Bernal. 

chiefly  relied  on  by  the  District  Attorney  as  affording  evidence  of 
fraud  on  the  part  of  the  claimants. 

On  examining  the  expediente  and  comparing  it  with  the  title 
papers  produced  by  the  claimants,  it  is  obvious  that  the  words 
"  y  Potrero  viejo  "  have  been  interlined  in  two  places,  and  in  one 
instance  in  a  handwriting  evidently  different  from  that  in  which  the 
body  of  the  document  is  written.  The  map,  too,  found  in  the  expe- 
diente differs  from  that  produced  by  the  party,  for  the  words  "  que 
pide  "  are  not  found  in  the  former. 

The  effect  of  these  discrepancies  will  be  subsequently  considered. 
It  is  sufficient  at  present  to  observe  that  the  only  inference  which 
can  by  possibility  be  drawn  from  them  is,  that  although  the  grant 
for  the  Salinas  was  regularly  obtained,  that  for  the  Potrero  Viejo 
has  been  subsequently  interpolated,  and  the  map  in  the  possession 
of  the  claimants  made  to  conform  to  the  interpolated  grant. 

The  principal  witnesses  produced  on  the  part  of  the  United  States 
to  establish  the  alleged  fraud  on  the  part  of  Dona  Carmen  Bernal 
were  Mrs.  Lowell  and  her  husband,  Marcus  Lowell,  and  a  Mexican 
woman  named  Teresa  Moreno. 

Amidst  the  contradictions,  inconsistencies  and  misstatements,  to 
call  them  by  no  harsher  name,  of  these  witnesses,  it  is  almost  impos- 
sible to  obtain  any  definite  idea  of  the  precise  character  of  the 
fraud  sought  to  be  established.  The  District  Attorney,  as  has  been 
stated,  did  not  in  his  argument  rely  on  their  evidence  as  estabhsh- 
ing  any  one  fact  in  the  case  ;  nor  did  the  counsel  retained  by  those 
who  have  an  interest  in  defeating  this  claim  attempt  to  reconcile 
the  contradictions  in  their  testimony,  or  to  deduce  from  it  any  clear 
or  consistent  theory  of  the  case  to  be  adopted  by  the  Court. 

The  principal  facts  sought  to  be  estabhshed  by  the  testimony  of 
these  witnesses  were  as  follows :  That  Dona  Carmen  Bernal  had 
shown  them  her  title  papers ;  that  the  papers  now  produced  are  the 
same,  but  have  since  been  altered ;  that,  as  testified  by  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Lowell,  the  alterations  were  effected  by  a  Mexican  who  came 
with  a  party  from  Monterey  for  the  purpose ;  or,  as  testified  by 
Teresa  Moreno,  that  the  papers  were  altered  by  a  person  named 
Barragan,  residing  in  the  house. 

On  examining  their  testimony,  it  strikes  us  as  surprising  that 


52  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT,     . 

United  States  v.  Bernal. 

Dona  Carmen  should  have  so  freely  exhibited  her  title  papers  to 
the  witnesses,  and  have  asked  their  opinion  as  to  their  validity, 
although  one  of  them,  and  the  only  one  who  seems  to  have  expressed 
an  opinion,  was  an  American  who  had  never  seen  a  Mexican  grant, 
and  who  was  unable  to  read  or  comprehend  a  word  of  Spanish ; 
and  it  appears,  at  least,  extremely  improbable  that  she  should  so 
freely  have  avowed  her  intention  to  have  the  fraudulent  alterations 
made  pursuant  to  the  suggestions  which  Mr.  Lowell  himself  tells  us 
he  did  not  scruple  to  make. 

In  testifying  to  the  alterations  made  in  the  papers,  the  witnesses 
professedly  rely  on  their  recollection  of  their  contents  when  exhib- 
ited to  them  in  1851.  They  took  no  copy  of  them,  nor  did  they 
make  any  comparison  then  of  the  papers  shown  them  with  any  others. 
They  merely  swear,  with  more  or  less  confidence,  that  certain  por- 
tions of  the  papers  have  since  been  added. 

Mrs.  Lowell,  who  was  the  first  witness  examined,  testified  that 
she  recognized  the  title  papers  as  those  shown  her  by  Dona  Carmen  ; 
that  the  words  "  el  terreno  de  la  Mision  que  pide  "  were  not  on 
the  map  when  she  saw  it,  nor  the  words  "  Laguna,"  "  terreno  que 
pide  "  and  "  aguagita ;  "  that  there  was  no  seal  on  the  eighth  page, 
and  that  the  date  on  that  page  has  been  altered ;  that  she  had  no 
recollection  of  the  seal  on  the  ninth  page,  and  that  there  is  more 
writing  on  it  now  than  when  she  saw  it ;  that  she  translated  it 
to  her  husband ;  and  that  what  she  translated  to  her  husband  con- 
tained no  grant  for  the  Potrero. 

With  regard  to  the  eighth  page,  Mrs.  Lowell  at  first  testified 
that  she  saw  no  alteration  or  addition  to  it,  except  the  certificate  of 
J.  L.  Herg  and  the  seal,  which  were  not  on  that  page  when  she 
saw  it  in  the  possession  of  Dona  Carmen.  That  she  was  sure  there 
were  no  other  alterations.  She  immediately  afterwards  stated  that 
she  was  not  quite  sure  she  had  ever  seen  the  eighth  page  before ; 
that  her  reason  for  supposing  it  to  be  the  same  paper  she  saw  before 
is,  that  it  was  "  the  same  looking  paper,"  and  that  the  writing 
looked  something  like  what  she  had  seen ;  and  she  adds  that  she 
cannot  say  on  oath  that  she  had  ever  seen  it  before. 

In  a  subsequent  part  of  her  examination,  she  states  that  she 
remembers  having  seen  the  eighth  page ;  that  the  word  "  Salinas  " 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  53 

United  States  v.  Bernal. 

on  that  page  has  since  been  "  put  in,"  and  that  she  is  certain  she 

saw  that  page  before  ''  by  the  reading  on  it." 

Marcus  Lowell,  her  husband,  when  called  to  the  stand,  testified 
with  a  confidence  and  an  apparent  candor  well  calculated  to  give 
plausibility  to  his  evidence.  In  some  particulars  his  testimony  con- 
flicts with  that  of  his  wife,  while  on  some  points,  and  those  the  most 
important,  it  is  completely  disproved.  This  witness  swears  in  the 
most  positive  manner  that  the  only  papers  he  ever  saw  were  the 
fifth,  sixth,  seventh  and  eighth  pages  of  the  originals  submitted ; 
that  he  never  saw  the  ninth  page  which  his  wife  stated  she  trans- 
lated to  him ;  and  that  the  eighth,  on  which  his  wife  detected  only 
a  few  alterations,  was  a  perfect  blank.  This  last  statement  he 
frequently  reiterates  with  a  positiveness  which  would  have  been 
impressive,  if  the  other  testimony  in  the  case  had  permitted  us  to 
hesitate  a  moment  in  beheving  him  to  have  been  mistaken. 

He  also  states  that  there  was  no  writing  whatever  in  the  place 
on  the  map  where  the  words  "  el  terrene  de  la  Mision  "  now  are  ; 
nor  were  the  points  of  the  compass  marked  on  it  then  as  now. 

On  both  these  points  the  opposing  testimony  is  conclusive.  On 
the  eighth  page,  which,  according  to  Mr.  Lowell,  was  a  blank,  and 
according  to  his  wife  there  was  writing,  but  no  certificate  of  the 
County  Recorder,  appears  the  certificate  of  that  ofiicer  duly  signed 
and  dated  February  19th,  1850,  more  than  a  year  previous  to  the 
time  when  the  witnesses  say  they  saw  it.  It  is  idle  to  allude  to 
the  absurdity  of  the  supposition  that  such  an  endorsement  would 
have  been  forged,  as  useless  crimes  are  not  ordinarily  committed ; 
•for  not  only  is  the  genuineness  of  the  signature  of  the  Recorder 
fully  proved,  but  the  original  records  from  his  office  are  produced, 
and  the  document  appears  fully  recorded  and  containing  everything 
which  Mrs.  Lowell  supposes  has  been  since  added.  The  record 
further  shows,  that  at  the  time  it  was  made,  all  the  documents 
existed  and  were  presented  for  record  precisely  in  the  state  they 
are  now  offered  to  the  Court,  with  the  exception  of  the  map,  which 
was  not  recorded  ;  and  it  conclusively  disproves,  not  only  Mr.  Low- 
ell's statement,  but  it  removes  whatever  doubts  might  have  been 
suggested  by  the  testimony  of  his  wife  as  to  additions  and  altera- 
tions which  she  swears  have  since  been  made. 


54  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Bernal. 

But  independentlj  of  this  and  other  evidence,  which  will  here- 
after be  adverted  to,  the  testimony  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lowell  on  the 
points  under  consideration  is  entitled  to  but  little  weight.  Their 
whole  evidence  is  exclusively  founded  on  their  reccollection  of  doc- 
uments seen  more  than  four  years  ago.  The  husband  was  then, 
and  is  now,  totally  ignorant  of  the  Spanish  language,  and  wholly 
unacquainted  with  the  forms  used  in  Mexican  grants ;  and  the  wife 
when  called  on  to  translate  in  open  Court  one  of  the  papers,  after 
slow  and  painful  attempts,  only  succeeded  in  rendering  into  English 
detached  words  and  "  disjecta  membra  "  of  sentences  not  sufficient 
to  convey  to  herself,  or  any  one  else,  a  clear  idea  of  the  purport  of 
the  document. 

It  is  incredible  that  the  recollections  of  such  witnesses  as  to  the 
contents  of  papers  could  be  sufficiently  accurate  to  justify  the  Court 
in  relying  with  confidence  on  their  testimony. 

With  a  view  of  showing  by  whom  the  alterations  in  the  papers 
were  made,  much  testimony  was  taken  as  to  the  visit  to  Dona  Car- 
men of  a  party  from  Monterey.  On  this  as  on  the  other  points  the 
witnesses  contradict  each  other. 

Mrs.  Lowell  swears  that  the  party  consisted  of  four — three  Amer- 
icans, dressed  in  American  costumes,  and  one  Mexican,  a  stout 
man  of  a  dark  complexion;  she  had,  however,  previously  stated 
that  she  did  not  know  of  what  country  three  of  them  were,  but  one 
was  a  Mexican.  She  further  says  that  they  went  together  into 
a  large  front  room,  but  that  she  did  not  go  into  it  while  they  were 
there. 

Her  husband  states,  with  considerable  minuteness,  the  appear- 
ance of  the  party :  that  three  were  Indians,  and  servants  to  the 
fourth,  who  was  a  Mexican  mounted  on  a  black  horse  ;  that  he  went 
into  the  house  while  his  servants  remained  in  the  kitchen ;  and  that 
he  wore  a  broadcloth  mantle  trimmed  with  silver. 

To  any  one  acquainted  with  the  difference  in  appearance  between 
Americans  and  the  Indians  of  the  country,  the  existence  of  such 
a  discrepancy  suggests  doubts  which  impair  the  credibihty  of  all 
the  evidence  of  these  witnesses. 

But  Mr.  Lowell  does  not  confine  himself  to  the  mere  statement, 
derived,  as  he  says,  from  Dona  Carmen,  that  the  Monterey  party 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  55 

United  States  v.  Bemal. 

had  "  fixed  "  the  papers.  He  testifies  that  while  the  Mexican  gen- 
tleman was  at  breakfast,  having  occasion  to  enter  the  room  of  Dona 
Carmen,  he  there  saw  on  the  table  some  Spanish  papers,  and  near 
them  a  kind  of  seal  corresponding  in  size  with  the  impression  on 
page  eight  of  the  original  document ;  that  he  examined  it  for  about 
half  a  minute,  and  that  he  is  sure  it  would  make  just  such  an  im- 
pression as  that  on  the  paper.  On  his  cross  examination  he  asserts 
with  characteristic  confidence  that  the  word  on  the  seal  was  Mon- 
terey (wTitten  Monterea,  or  Monte  de  rea).  There  was  also  a 
word  before  Monterea.  "  He  is  very  certain  of  it ;  he  cannot  be 
mistaken."  It  will  be  remembered  that  he  and  his  wife  had  pre- 
viously sworn  that  when  they  saw  page  eight,  there  was  no  seal 
upon  it.  The  object  of  Mr.  Lowell's  testimony  is  therefore  appa- 
rent. Unfortunately  however,  for  Mr.  Lowell's  statement,  it  is 
shown  conclusively  by  the  testimony  of  Francisco  Arce,  who  was 
a  clerk  in  the  office  of  the  Secretary  of  the  former  government, 
and  sometimes  Secretary  ad  interim,  and  by  that  of  Governor  Al- 
varado,  who  has  held  almost  every  office  of  dignity  in  California 
under  the  Mexican  rule,  that  the  impression  on  the  eighth  page  is 
that  of  the  private  seal  of  the  Secretary  of  Dispatch ;  that  they 
have  frequently  seen  it  used,  and  examined  it,  and  that  it  has  no 
letters  whatever  upon  it.  A  close  inspection  of  the  impression  on 
the  paper  confirms  this  statement,  and  its  accuracy  is  conclusively 
established  by  the  exhibition  of  a  similar  but  less  blotted  impres- 
sion of  the  same  seal  on  another  document  from  the  archives, 
which  shows  beyond  a  doubt  that  the  device  on  the  stamp  had  no 
letters  upon  it.  The  account  given  by  the  Mexican  woman  Te- 
resa Moreno,  of  the  person  by  whom  the  alterations  were  made,  is 
different ;  she  says  that  in  January,  1852,  she  saw  a  Mexican  who 
had  been  Hving  in  Doila  Carmen's  house  for  a  year,  more  or  less, 
altering  them.  Though  she  at  first  was  unable  to  say  who  he  was, 
she  subsequently  identified  a  person  then  in  Court,  as  the  individ- 
ual. At  his  own  request,  this  person,  whose  name  was  Barragari, 
was  placed  on  the  stand,  where  he,  in  the  most  solemn  and  emphatic 
manner,  denied  having  altered  or  even  seen  the  papers.  He  fur- 
ther stated  that  at  the  time  mentioned,  he  was  not  living  in  Dona 
Carmen's  house,  and  in  this  last  statement  he  is  corroborated  by 


56  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Bemal. 

the  testimony  of  another  witness,  Ramon  De  Zaldo,  who  knew  him 
at  the  Mission  until  after  the  time  when,  according  to  Teresa,  the 
alterations  were  made.  But  from  Teresa  Moreno  we  learn  who 
was  the  Mexican  mentioned  by  Lowell  and  his  wife  as  having 
made  the  alterations.  She  states  that  it  was  a  Mr.  Hartnell,  a 
relative  of  Doiia  Carmen.  Unfortunately,  this  gentleman  is  now 
dead,  but  witnesses  of  the  greatest  respectabihty  testified  to  his 
character.  He  seem.s  to  have  enjoyed  to  an  extraordinary  degree 
a  reputation  for  integrity.  He  was  an  Enghshman  by  birth,  but 
long  resident  in  this  country,  where  he  had  acquired  a  considerable 
property,  and  the  witnesses  called  to  testify  as  to  his  character, 
seem  at  pains  to  express,  in  the  strongest  manner,  their  sense  of  his 
high  reputation  for  probity  and  inflexible  honesty.  He  is  shown 
moreover,  to  have  been  a  short  stout  man,  of  a  florid  or  hght  com- 
plexion, such  as  is  usual  in  Enghshmen,  and  to  have  worn  the 
ordinary  dress  of  his  countrymen  or  of  Americans.  While  Hsten- 
ing  to  the  description  of  his  appearance  given  by  the  witnesses,  it 
was  certainly  not  easy  for  the  Court  to  recognize  in  him  the  Mex- 
ican of  dark  complexion,  mounted  on  a  black  horse,  and  clad  in  a 
broadcloth  mantilla,  laced  with  silver,  described  by  Mr.  Lowell. 

One  other  point  on  which  the  testimony  of  Mrs.  Lowell  and  her 
husband  may  be  deemed  material,  remains  to  be  noticed,  viz :  the 
admissions  of  Mrs.  Bernal  to  them. 

,  Mrs.  Lowell  in  her  direct  examination,  swears  that  she  told  Mrs. 
Bernal  she  had  better  have  the  papers  fixed ;  that  there  was  one 
paper  that  had  a  seal  to  it  which  was  right,  but  the  other,  which 
had  no  seal,  was  not  right.  Mrs.  Bernal  then  said  she  would  have 
them  fixed;  "that  she  had  no  doubt  as  to  the  Potrero,  but  had 
some  doubts  as  to  the  place  where  she  was  living,  the  latter  being 
called  Doiia  Carmen's  rancho." 

She  further  states  that  after  the  visit  of  the  party  from  Monte- 
rey, Mrs.  Bernal  told  her  the  papers  had  been  fixed  good  and  sure, 
and  that  she  now  had  the  title  for  the  place  she  was  hving  on ; 
that  she  had  heard  Mrs.  Bernal  speak  to  her  (the  witness')  husband 
about  the  date  of  the  papers,  and  say  to  him  that  she  should  have  the 
date  made  later  than  it  was ;  that  he  advised  her  to  get  the  papers 
right  for  the  place  on  which  she  then  was  living,  as  they  were  not 


JUNE  TERM,  1855.  57 

United  States  v.  Bernal. 

right  as  thej  were,  and  that  Mrs.  Bernal  rephed  she  would  get  her 
lawyer  to  fix  them.  The  change  recommended,  was  to  get  the  title 
papers  so  fixed  as  to  embrace  the  Potrero,  and  the  Rincon  de  las 
Sahnas. 

Mr.  Lowell  testifies  that  Mrs.  Bernal  stated  to  him  that  she  had 
no  fear  as  to  the  Potrero,  because  she  had  lived  on  it,  and  done  all 
that  was  required  of  her,  but  that  she  was  doubtful  as  to  the 
other  part,  and  therefore  went  and  lived  on  it.  That  he  thereupon 
gave  her  some  advice,  which  he  declines  to  state,  on  the  ground 
that  it  would  criminate  himself,  to  which  Dona  Carmen  replied  that 
there  were-  parties  who  she  understood  could  correct  the  papers. 
After  the  visit  of  the  party  from  Monterey,  the  witness  adds, 
Dona  Carmen  seemed  to  be  in  good  spirits. 

The  above  embraces  all  the  admissions  of  Mrs.  Bernal  which 
might  seem  to  possess  any  importance. 

If  they  prove  anything,  they  prove  that  Mrs.  Bernal's  title  to 
the  Potrero  viejo  was,  in  her  own  opinion,  perfectly  good,  and  that 
the  necessity  for  the  papers  being  fixed,  either  by  her  lawyer,  Mr. 
Halleck,  or  by  her  friends  from  Monterey,  only  existed  with  regard 
to  the  Rincon  de  las  Salinas,  and  that  they  were  so  fixed  by  the 
party  from  Monterey,  which  figures  so  largely  in  their  evidence. 

Whatever  doubts  might  arise  in  any  case  as  to  the  reliability  of 
evidence  of  conversations  and  admissions,  they  present  themselves 
in  this  case  with  unusual  force.  Not  only  do  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lowell 
contradict  each  other  on  many  points,  but  the  unfortunate  attempt 
of  the  former  to  strengthen  his  evidence  by  an  account  of  his  dis- 
covery of  a  seal  in  the  bed  chamber  of  Mrs.  Bernal  abundantly 
justifies  us  in  receiving  with  distrust  and  suspicion  every  statement 
which  he  makes.  That  Mrs.  Bernal  should  have  announced  the 
fact  that  she  had  procured  a  forgery  to  be  committed,  is  incredible ; 
and  to  suppose  that  she  so  freely  declared  her  intentions  to  procure 
for  that  purpose  the  services  of  a  gentleman  so  well  known,  and  of 
such  high^  character  as  Mr.  Halleck,  is  absurd.  If  any  explana- 
nation  of  these  statements  by  Mrs.  Bernal  is  needed,  it  is  found  in 
the  testimony  of  Teresa  Moreno.  That  witness  states  that  after 
Mr.  Hartnell  left,  Mrs.  Bernal  said  she  had  determined  to  take  his 
advice,  which  was  to  consult  Mr.  Halleck  as  to  the  expediency  of 
5 


58  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Bernal. 

selling,  renting  or  otherwise  disposing  of  the  property.  It  was 
probably  some  such  remark  as  this,  perhaps  misunderstood,  cer- 
tainly misrepresented,  which  has  suggested  to  the  fertile  imagina- 
tions of  the  witnesses  the  story  of  the  Monterey  party,  with  all  its 
dramatic  details.  But  independently  of  the  intrinsic  incredibility 
of  the  testimony  of  these  witnesses,  there  are  some  clearly  estab- 
lished facts  in  the  case  which  conclusively  disprove  it. 

The  record  produced  from  the  Recorder's  office,  shows  beyond 
a  doubt  that  the  original  papers,  as  they  now  exist,  were  recorded 
there  more  than  a  year  before  the  time  when  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lowell 
first  saw  them.  The  ingenuity  of  counsel  has  suggested  no  answ^er 
to  this  decisive  fact,  nor  can  any  be  given,  unless  we  suppose  that 
a  wholesale  falsification  of  those  records  has  been  committed  by 
another  party  from  Monterey,  who  in  some  unexplained  way  have 
obtained  access  to  them,. and  who  have  since  consummated  their 
crime  by  forging  the  name  of  J.  L.  Herg,  the  Recorder,  appended 
to  the  endorsement  on  the  originals.  With  a  view  of  strengthening 
their  case,  the  original  expediente  from  the  archives  was  introduced 
by  the  counsel  of  the  parties  interested  in  defeating  this  claim. 
By  a  comparison  of  that  document  with  the  original  title  papers 
in  the  possession  of  the  party,  the  origin  of  the  charge  of  fraud  in 
this  case  becomes  obvious. 

The  petition  asks  for  a  grant  of  the  Rincon  de  las  Salinas  alone, 
and  not  for  the  Potrero  viejo.  (This  petition,  it  may  be  observed 
in  passing,  which  was  never  included  among  the  title  papers  deliv- 
ered to  the  party,  Teresa  Moreno  swears  was  shown  her  by  Mrs. 
Bernal,  and  that  it  asked  for  the  Potrero  viejo.)  The  concession 
which  follows  the  petition,  declares  Don  Cornelio  Bernal  owner  in 
full  property  of  the  place  named  Las  Salinas,  with  the  Potrero 
viejo.  In  this  document,  which  was  the  original  concession  by  the 
Governor,  the  handwriting  is  similar  throughout,  and  there  is  noth- 
ing to  suggest  any  interpolation.  But  in  the  record  of  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  Departmental  Assembly,  the  words  ''  y  Potrero 
viejo  "  have  evidently  been  interlined  at  a  time  and  wath  ink  dif- 
ferent from  that  used  in  the  body  of  the  document.  In  the  copy 
of  the  document  or  title  paper  delivered  to  the  party,  which  forms 
part  of  the  expediente,  the  words  "con  el  Potrero  viejo"  have  in 


JUNE  TERM,  1855.  59 


United  States  v.  Bernal. 


like  manner  been  iiKerlined,  but  whether  in  the  same  handwriting 
as  that  in  which  the  rest  of  the  record  is  written,  it  is  not  easy  on 
inspection  to  discover.  Whether  or  not  there  is  reason  to  beheve, 
under  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  that  the  grant  for  the  Potrero 
viejo  has  been  fraudulently  added  to  the  original  grant,  will  pres- 
ently be  considered.  One  fact  is  apparent,  that  tife  doubt  exists 
as  to  the  Potrero,  and  not  as  to  the  Salinas,  and  that  the  efforts  of 
the  witness,  Mrs.  Lowell,  to  cast  a  doubt  on  the  title  to  the  Salinas, 
by  suggesting  that  those  words  have  been  added  on  the  eighth 
page,  however  well  meant,  were  certainly  misdirected.  The  same 
witness  testifies,  as  has  been  before  stated,  that  Mrs.  Bernal  said 
she  had  no  doubt  as  to  the  Potrero,  but  had  some  doubts  as  to  the 
place  she  was  living  on,  and  that  after  the  departure  of  the  party  from 
Monterey,  the  papers  had  been  "  fixed  good  and  sure,"  and  that  she 
now  had  a  title  for  the  place  she  was  living  on.  It  is  apparent 
that  the  inference  sought  to  be  drawn  from  the  interlineations  of 
the  words  Potrero  viejo  in  the  expediente,  is  wholly  inconsistent 
with  the  theory  of  the  case,  which  supposes  the  fraud  to  have  been 
committed  with  regard  to  the  Salinas;  and  the  suspicion  is  suggested 
that  the  witnesses,  though  intending  perhaps  to  confirm  by  their  tes- 
timony whatever  doubts  might  arise  from  the  appearance  of  the 
expediente,  have  unfortunately  mistaken  the  object  of  their  attack, 
and  have  directed  the  fraudulent  efforts  of  the  Monterey  party 
upon  the  SaUnas,  when  the  true  theory  of  the  case  demanded  that 
they  should  have  related  to  the  Potrero  exclusively. 

Discarding,  then,  without  further  comment  the  testimony  we 
have  been  considering,  we  approach  the  examination  of  the  point 
on  which  the  District  Attorney  exclusively  relied  in  his  argument. 

It  has  already  been  stated  that  the  words  "Potrero  viejo"  have 
been  interlined  in  the  expediente  in  two  places — in  the  copy  of 
the  documento  or  title  paper,  and  in  the  record  of  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  Departmental  Assembly.  This  circumstance, 
together  with  the  facts  that  the  original  petition  does  not  ask  for 
the  Potrero,  and  that  the  map  accompanying  it  does  not  contain 
the  words  "  que  pide  "  after  the  words  "  terreno  do  la  mision," 
are  relied  on  by  the  District  Attorney  as  tending  to  show  a  fraudu- 
lent alteration  of  the  title  papers. 


60  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Bernal. 

-  ^  _ 

If  the  documents  from  the  archives  were  the  true  and  only  title 
deeds  of  the  claimants,  this  objection  might  well  be  deemed  insu- 
perable. , 

It  will  be  remembered  that  by  the  Regulations  of  1828,  it  is 
made  the  duty  of  the  Governor,  after  taking  the  necessary  infor- 
mation as  to  the  propriety  of  granting  the  land  solicited,  to  accede 
or  not  to  the  petition.  When  he  determined  to  grant  the  prayer 
of  the  petitioner,  a  decree  or  concession  was  made  by  him  declar- 
ing the  appellant  to  be  the  owner  in  full  property  of  the  land  solic- 
ited. This  decree  is  invariably  found  in  the  expediente,  and  it 
usually  commences  with  the  words  "  Vista  la  peticion."  When 
the  approval  of  the  Assembly  was  obtained,  a  certificate  of  the  fact 
was  given  to  the  interested  party  ;  but  an  expediente  containing 
the  report  of  the  committee  and  the  resolution  of  approval,  signed 
by  the  President  of  the  Assembly,  seems  to  have  been  transmitted 
to  the  Governor,  and  retained  in  the  archives.  The  concession  of 
the  Governor  having  been  definitively  made,  it  was  his  duty,  under 
the  seventh  article  of  the  Regulations,  to  issue  to  the  party  inter- 
ested a  '•'  documento"  or  grant,  which  might  serve  as  a  title  paper. 

A  copy  of  this  documento  or  title  paper  issued  to  the  party  was 
made,  and  in  some  instances  recorded  in  a  book  kept  for  that  pur- 
pose. This  copy,  found  in  the  expediente,  is  usually,  as  in  the  case 
before  us,  not  signed,  and,  as  appears  by  the  testimony  of  Mr. 
Evershed,  often  contains  erasures  and  interlineations. 

The  instrument,  then,  by  which  the  title  passed  to  the  party 
was  the  "  documento,"  delivered  to  him  after  the  concession  was 
made,  and  to  this  and  to  the  concession  which  preceded  it,  we  must 
look  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  the  grant. 

On  referring  to  the  expediente,  we  find  the  concession  duly 
signed  by  the  Governor  and  the  Secretary  (the  latter  of  whom 
established  the  genuineness  of  his  signature  by  his  own  oath  in 
Court).  The  land  granted  is  mentioned  as  "  the  Salinas  a7id  the 
Potrero  viejo.^^  No  suggestion  has  been  made  that  these  words 
are  not  in  the  same  handwriting,  nor  that  any  interpolation  has 
been  made  in  this  instrument.  The  documento  or  title  paper  pro- 
duced by  the  party,  is  in  exact  conformity  with  the  concession,  with- 
out interlineations  or  interpolations.     The  genuineness  of  this  doc- 


JUNE  TERM,  1855.  61 

United  States  v.  Bernal. 

ument  is  fully  proved  by  Don  Francisco  Arce,  who  testifies  not 
only  to  his  own  signature  and  that  of  the  Governor,  but  he  also 
declares  the  whole  document  to  be  in  his  own  handwriting. 

We  think  that  from  the  testimony  of  Governor  Alvarado  and  of 
Don  Francisco  Arce,  it  is  clear  that  these  papers  are  genuine,  and 
there  is  nothing  either  in  the  evidence  or  in  their  appearance  to 
justify  a  suspicion  that  they  have  in  any  way  been  altered,  for  we 
consider  the  circumstance  that  the  unsigned  draft  or  copy  of  the 
documento  has  been  interlined  as  of  no  weight  where  the  original 
is  produced,  and  its  authenticity  fully  established. 

The  effect  of  the  interlineation  in  the  resolutions  of  the  Depart- 
mental Assembly  remains  to  be  considered.  In  that  paper  the 
words  "y  Potrero  viejo,"  spelled  "  vejo,"  have  evidently  been 
interlined. 

With  respect  to  this  interlineation,  Francisco  Arce  testifies  that 
he  thinks  it  in  the  handwriting  of  a  person  named  Gonzales,  who 
was  employed  in  the  Secretary's  office.  The  certificate  of  the 
approval  of  the  Assembly  dehvered  to  the  party  is  without  inter- 
lineation or  alteration  of  any  kind,  and  it  refers  to  the  Potrero 
viejo  as  well  as  the  Safinas.  The  signatures  of  Alvarado  and 
Jimeno  to  this  document  are  conclusively  proved,  the  former  by 
Governor  Alvarado  himself.  The  handwriting  of  the  body  of  the 
instrument  is  also  proved  to  be  that  of  one  Estrada,  a  clerk  in  the 
Secretary's  office.  But  we  are  fortified  in  the  conclusion  with 
respect  to  the  authenticity  of  this  certificate  to  which  we  are  irre- 
sistably  led  by  the  evidence,  by  some  considerations  suggested  by 
the  papers  themselves. 

By  the  terms  of  the  resolution  of  the  Assembly,  as  found  in  the 
archives,  that  body  approves  the  concession  made  by  the  Governor, 
ad  interim^  Don  Manuel  Jimeno,  of  the  tract  of  land  called  Las 
Salinas  "  y  Potrero  vejo^'*  the  last  words  being  interlined.  Now, 
the  concession  of  Governor  Jimeno  is,  as  we  have  seen,  for  the 
Salinas  and  also  the  Potrero  viejo.  If,  therefore,  the  Assem- 
bly meant  to  approve  the  concession,  as  they  evidently  did,  they 
must  have  intended  to  approve  the  grant  for  both  pieces  of  land. 
The  omission  of  the  Protrero  viejo  was  in  all  probability  a  clerical 
error,  which  was  corrected  when  the  terms  of  the  concession  were 
compared  with  those  of  the  resolution  of  approval. 


62  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Bernal. 

On  the  back  of  this  page  of  the  expediente  appears  a  memoran- 
dum, stating  that  on  the  thirtieth  day  of  May  a  testimonio  or  cer- 
tificate of  the  foregoing  approbation  was  delivered  to  the  party. 

On  referring  to  this  testimonio  produced  by  the  claimants,  we 
find  it  dated  the  thirtieth  of  May,  1840,  in  conformity  with  the 
memorandum,  and  it  is  signed  by  Alvarado,  as  Governor,  and 
Manuel  Jimeno,  Secretary.  Unless,  then,  the  signature  of  Jimeno 
is  ft)rged,  an  idea  not  suggested  by  any  one  in  the  case,  and  wholly 
inadmissible,  we  must  suppose  that  the  Assembly  confirmed  the 
concession  for  the  Potrero  viejo,  as  well  as  that  for  the  Salinas, 
according  to  the  tenor  of  the  certificate,  for  the  resolution  of 
approval  is  signed  by  the  same  Jimeno  as  President,  and  is  for  the 
confirmation  of  a  grant  made  by  himself.  If,  therefore,  the  Assem- 
bly had  only  approved,  as  contended,  the  Salinas  concession,  while 
that  for  the  Potrero  has  since  been  fraudulently  inserted,  Jimeno, 
the  President  of  the  Assembly,  who  authenticates  the  record  by 
his  signature,  must  surely  have  known  it ;  and  yet,  within  eight 
days  after  the  passage  of  the  resolution,  he  signs  a  testimonio 
for  the  approval  of  the  concession  of  both  tracts  to  be  dehvered  to 
the  party. 

But  we  think  that  the  burden  of  accounting  for  the  interlinea- 
tion in  the  report  of  the  committee  cannot  justly  be  thrown  upon 
the  claimants.  They  produce  the  certificate  of  the  approval,  duly 
authenticated.  The  genuineness  of  this  document  is  not  disputed, 
or  if  disputed,  it  is  conclusively  proved.  That  the  report  of  the 
committee,  with  the  resolution  of  approval  attached,  which  is  pre- 
served in  the  archives,  should  contain  interlineations  is  a  circum- 
stance which  might  very  naturally  happen,  and  yet  the  claimants 
may  have  no  means  to  explain  it.  If  the  certificate  of  the  approval 
given  to  the  party  interested  be  genuine,  it  must  be  received  as  the 
legal  and  conclusive  evidence  of  the  fact,  unless  other  circumstances 
show  that  it  was  improperly  furnished  through  fraud  or  mistake. 

An  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  opponents  of  this  claim  to  show 
by  whom  the  interlineations  in  the  expediente  were  made  should 
perhaps  be  noticed. 

Mr.  James  Thompson,  a  witness  produced  on  the  part  of  the 
United  States,  on  being  shown  the  expediente,  testified  that  he  had 


JUNE  TERM,  1855.  63 

United  States  v.  Bernal. 

seen  it  several  times  in  tbe  office  of  the  Surveyor  General ;  that 
he  recognized  one  page  certainly  from  the  interlineations  upon  it ; 
that  he  believed  he  had  seen  the  same  paper  in  the  hands  of  Mr. 
De  Zaldo,  at  the  Mission.  He  was  then  asked  what  Mr.  De  Zaldo 
had  told  him  with  respect  to  the  paper.  To  this  inquiry,  the  coun- 
sel for  the  respondents  objected,  and  the  objection  was  sustained 
by  the  Court.  William  Corbett  also  testified  that  he  had  fre- 
quently met  Mr.  De  Zaldo  on  the  road  between  this  city  and  the 
Mission  with  a  bundle.  He  was  then  asked  what  was  the  subject 
of  the  conversation,  and  what  he  said  he  had  in  the  bundle.  To 
this  question  the  counsel  for  the  respondent  objected,  and  the 
objection  was  sustained  by  the  Court. 

With  a  view,  however,  of  enabling  the  parties  to  prove,  if  possi- 
ble, that  Mr.  De  Zaldo  had  some  knowledge  of  or  connection  with 
the  alterations  in  the  expediente,  that  gentleman  was  placed  upon 
the  stand  by  the  Court.  He  denied,  in  the  most  emphatic  manner, 
and  with  an  indignation  not  unnatural,  that  he  had  ever  had  the 
expediente  in  his  possession,  except  in  the  office  and  as  keeper  of 
the  archives,  and  stated  that  it  had  never,  to  his  knowledge,  been 
out  of  the  archives.  He  also  denied  in  the  most  positive  manner 
ever  having  stated  to  Mr.  Thompson  that  he  had  many  Mexican 
archives  in  his  possession  ;  and  with  reference  to  Mr.  Corbett's  tes- 
timony, he  explained  that  he  had  been  employed  in  translating 
many  expedientes  for.  a  legal  firm  in  this  city,  but  that  those  trans- 
lations were  made  from  fae  simile  copies  on  tracing  paper,  made 
in  the  Surveyor  General's  office,  and  that  the  originals  were  in  no 
case  taken  from  the  archives. 

No  questions  were  put  to  the  witness  as  to  any  conversations 
with  Mr.  Thompson  relative  to  alterations  in  the  documents,  and 
the  attempt  to  prove  that  he  had  made  such  declarations,  if  ever 
seriously  made,  seemed  to  be  abandoned. 

Much  time  was  consumed  on  the  trial  of  the  cause  in  hearing 
testimony  of  experts  and  others  as  to  alterations  in  or  additions  to 
the  map  produced  by  the  claimants. 

We  do  not  deem  it  necessary  to  refer  particularly  to  the  evi- 
dence on  this  point.  The  testimony  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lowell  with 
regard   to  other  alterations    has   been    so   conclusively    refuted, 


64  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


United  States  v.  BemaL 


that  we  think  no  rehance  whatever  can  be  placed  on  their  recol- 
lection as  to  what  words  were  or  were  not  on  the  map  when  it 
was  exhibited  to  them.  The  testimony  of  the  experts  called  to 
prove  by  inspection  that  the  words  on  the  map  were,  in  their 
opinion,  written  by  a  different  hand,  or  at  different  times,  or  with 
different  ink,  or  with  a  different  pen,  must,  we  think,  be  regarded 
rather  as  plausible  conjectures  than  as  affording  any  solid  basis  for 
an  absolute  conclusion. 

On  comparing,  however,  the  map  in  the  expediente  with  that 
produced  by  the  party,  we  find  that  the  words  "  que  pide  " 
do  not  appear  in  the  former.  But  it  is  to  be  considered  that 
the  grant  is  for  "  Las  Salinas  and  the  Potrero  viejo,"  as  shown 
by  the  map  which  accompanies  the  expediente.  To  this  latter  alone, 
then,  we  look  to  ascertain  the  situation  and  boundaries  of  the 
granted  land,  and  on  this  it  is  not  suggested  that  any  alteration  or 
addition  has  been  made. 

How  the  certified  copy  of  the  map  in  the  possession  of  the  party 
came  to  differ  from  that  in  the  expediente,  does  not  appear,  but 
Francisco  Arce  testifies  that  all  the  writing  on  it  is  in  the  hand  of 
Pedro  Estrada,  the  words  "  que  pide,"  as  well  as  the  rest. 

That  those  words  have  been  fraudulently  inserted,  is,  we  think, 
an  idea  that  cannot  be  entertained,  for  so  long  as  the  map  in  the 
expediente,  according  to  which  the  land  was  granted  and  to  which 
the  grant  refers,  remained  unaltered,  any  addition  to  the  certified 
copy  was  wholly  useless.  The  fact  that  the  expediente  map  remains 
unaltered,  has  even  a  double  significance,  for  it  serves  to  repel  the 
suspicion  that  the  expediente  has  been  tampered  with.  Whoever 
was  engaged  in  introducing  fraudulent  interlineations  into  that  in- 
strument, would  hardly  have  omitted  to  make  such  additions  to  the 
map  as  were  necessary  to  carry  out  his  object. 

We  have  thus,  with  some  care  and  at  perhaps  unnecessary  length, 
reviewed  the  testimony  in  this  case.  We  find  no  reason  to  con- 
clude, perhaps  none  even  to  suspect,  that  any  fraud  has  been  at- 
tempted. 

To  suppose  it  to  have  been  committed,  a  series  of  forgeries  and 
perjuries  must  have  been  committed  of  an  extent  and  character 
without  parallel. 


JUNE  TERM,  1855.  65 


United  States  v.  Bemal. 


In  the  first  place,  the  documento  or  title  paper  in  the  possession 
of  the  party,  together  with  the  certificate  of  the  approval  of  the 
Departmental  Assembly,  with  all  their  signatures,  must  have  been 
forged.  The  original  concession  in  the  expediente  must  also  have 
been  forged,  and  the  skillful  hand  which  could  thus  have  imitated 
Jimeno's  writing,  must  be  supposed  to  have  made  the  interlineations 
in  the  resolutions  of  the  Assembly  and  the  copy  of  the  grant,  with- 
out an  attempt  to  make  these  interlineations  resemble  the  writing 
of  the  body  of  the  instruments.  The  map,  perhaps  from  some 
sudden  qualm  of  conscience,  he  must  have  wholly  neglected,  al- 
though the  mere  addition  of  the  words  "  que  pide  "  would  have 
accompUshed  his  object. 

In  addition  to  this,  if  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lowell  are  to  be  believed, 
the  useless  crime  of  forging  the  name  of  the  County  Recorder  in 
this  city  must  have  been  committed,  and  some  means  have  been 
discovered  to  procure  the  recording  at  length,  in  the  books  of  the 
Recorder,  of  all  the  original  papers  precisely  as  they  are  now  ex- 
hibited— the  record  purporting  to  have  been  made  more  than  a 
year  before  the  time  when,  according  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lowell,  the 
originals,  which  have  since  been  altered,  were  exhibited  to  them. 
A  supposition  involving  such  a  series  of  impossible  or  improbable 
crimes,  we  are  surely  justified,  under  the  evidence  in  this  cause,  in 
rejecting. 

No  other  objections  to  the  confirmation  of  this  claim  than  those 
we  have  been  considering,  have  been  urged  before  this  Court.  It 
is  not  denied  that  the  grantee  fulfilled  the  conditions  of  his  grant. 
He  appears  to  have  resided  on  his  land  from  the  date  of  his  grant 
until  his  decease,  and  his  widow  and  heirs  still  continue  to  occupy  it. 

The  only  objections  raised  by  the  law  agent  before  the  Board 
were,  that  the  land  was  within  the  ten  littoral  leagues,  and  that  no 
juridical  possession  of  it  was  given.  Both  of  these  objections  this 
Court  has  already  considered  and  overruled. 

The  claim  of  the  respondents  must  therefore  be  affirmed. 


66  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


Maria  Antonia  Mesa  v.  United  States. 


MARIA  ANTONIA  MESA,  claiming  the  Rancho  Rinconada 
DEL  Arroyo  de  San  Francisquito,  Appellant,  vs.  THE 
UNITED  STATES. 

The  objection  by  the  Board  to  the  confirmation  of  this  claim  obviated  by  the  ad- 
ditional testimony  taken  in  this  Court. 

Claim  for  about  half  a  league  of  land  in  Santa  Clara  county, 
rejected  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimant. 

Jeremiah  Clarke,  for  Appellant. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

This  case  has  been  submitted  to  the  Court  without  argument ; 
we  are  referred,  however,  by  the  District  Attorney  to  the  opinion 
of  the  Board  of  Commissioners  for  a  statement  of  the  objection  to 
the  vahdity  of  the  claim  on  which  he  relies. 

The  ground  on  which  the  claim  was  rejected  by  the  Board  was 
that  there  was  no  description  of  the  granted  land,  either  in  the 
grant  itself  or  the  map  which  accompanies  it,  sufficient  to  designate 
it  and  effect  its  segregation  from  the  public  domain,  or  rather  from 
the  adjoining  Mission  lands,  out  of  which  it  was  to  be  taken. 

The  land  is  described  in  the  grant  as  the  land  known  as  the 
Rinconada  del  Arroyo  de  San  Francisquito,  and  bordering  on  the 
land  of  the  Pulgas,  belonging  to  Dona  Soledad  Ortega,  and  on  the 
land  of-  the  establishment  of  Santa  Clara. 

By  reference  to  the  map,  the  course  of  the  Arroyo  San  Francis- 
quito, which  is  the  southern  boundary  of  the  Pulgas  land,  appears 
clearly  laid  down.  The  northern  boundary  of  the  land  intended 
to  be  granted  is  thus  ascertained,  but  the  claim  was  rejected  by 
the  Board  because  "  there  are  no  other  indications  or  lines  on  the 
map  to  show  the  size,  the  shape,  or  the  location  of  the  tract,"  the 
only  information  conveyed  by  the  map  being  that  the  land  fronts 
somewhere  on  that  creek,  but  on  what  portion  of  it,  or  to  what 
extent  does  not  appear. 

It  is  unnecessary  to   inquire  how  far  the  legal  principle  upon 


JUNE  TERM,  1855.  67 

iL-__ 

Maria  Antonia  Mesa  v.  United  States, 

which  the  decision  of  the  Board  is  founded,  is  affected  bj  the  case 
of  Fremont  vs.  The   United  States. 

From  additional  testimony  of  Aaron  Van  Dorn  taken  in  this  Court, 
it  appears  that,  as  a  Deputy  United  States  Surveyor,  he  has  sur- 
veyed the  adjoining  ranches,  and  is  acquainted  with  the  surround- 
ing country,  and  that  there  is  no  difficulty  whatever  in  locating  the 
land  by  means  of  the  calls  in  the  grant  and  the  map. 

This  witness  testifies  that  the  principal  objects  mentioned  for 
boundaries  are  natural  objects,  well  known  and  defined.  That 
those  objects  exist  to  the  witness'  own  knowledge,  and  that  while 
making  a  survey  of  the  adjoining  ranches,  a  certified  copy  of  the 
map  in  this  case  constituted  a  part  of  his  instructions  from  the 
Surveyor  General. 

The  objection  therefore  raised  by  the  Board  to  the  claim  would 
seem  to  be  entirely  obviated  by  this  testimony.  In  confirmation 
or  this  evidence,  it  may  be  observed  that  the  tract  of  land  solicited 
appears  from  the  documents  in .  the  expediente  to  have  been  well 
known  to  the  Governor,  and  by  those  officers  whom  he  directed  to 
report  upon  the  application. 

The  petition  asks  for  a  piece  of  land  adjacent  to  the  lower  part 
of  San  Francisquito  Creek  on  the  south,  the  situation  of  which 
forms  a  corner,  as  will  appear  by  the  map ;  said  location  is  bor- 
dering on  the  Pulgas  Rancho,  and  its  extent  is  probably  half  a 
square  league.  The  petitioner  further  states  that  about  two  years 
before,  he  had  obtained  permission  to  occupy  this  land  from  the 
the  administrador  of  Santa  Clara.  The  officers  to  whom  reference 
for  information  is  had,  report  that  the  land  solicited  is  known  to 
belong  to  the  Mission  of  Santa  Clara,  and  that,  as  the  map  shows, 
part  of  it  belongs  to  the  widow  Soledad  Ortega. 

Jos^  Estrada  reports  that  the  land  on  which  the  house  is  situated, 
belongs  to  the  heirs  of  Don  Louis  Arguello,  and  on  the  land  in  the 
direction  of  Santa  Clara,  on  this  side  of  the  San  Francisquito,  the 
cattle  and  horses  of  the  ex-mission  pastured,  and  that  it  is  the  only 
watering  place  on  said  location. 

The  Prefect  to  whom  the  Governor  refers  the  whole  matter, 
reports  that  the  house,  which,  according  to  the  map,  stands  on  the 
land  belonging  to  the  widow  Soledad,  has  been  moved,  as  he  is 


68  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Soto. 

informed  by  the  petitioner,  and  that  the  cattle  of  the  ex-mission 
have  enough  land  above  what  the  petitioner  solicits. 

We  think  it  evident  from  the  general  tenor  of  these  reports, 
that  the  Governor  and  the  officers  must  have  had  a  clear  and  defi- 
nite idea  of  the  situation  and  extent  of  the  land  intended  to  be 
granted,  and  when  in  addition  we  have  the  direct  testimony  of  a 
Deputy  United  States  Surveyor  that  the  land  can,  by  means  of  the 
map  and  the  calls  on  the  grant,  be  readily  located,  we  think  that 
no  ground  remains  for  the  rejection  of  this  claim  for  want  of  defi- 
niteness. 

No  other  objection  is  mentioned  by  the  Commissioners.  The 
genuineness  of  the  grant  is  not  disputed,  and  the  grantee  appears 
to  have  fully  complied  with  the  conditions. 

A  decree  of  confirmation  must  therefore  be  entered. 


THE  UNITED   STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  JOSEFA   SOTO, 

CLAIMING   THE   RaNCHO    CaPAY, 

Entitled  to  confirmation  under  the  rulings  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Fremont's 
case. 

Claim  for  ten  leagues  of  land  in  Colusa  county,  confirmed  by  the 
Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 
William  H.  McKee,  for  Appellee. 

This  cause  has  been  submitted  without  argument,  and  no  reason 
for  reversing  the  decision  of  the  Board  has  been  suggested  to  us. 

The  expediente,  containing  the  petition,  the  order  of  the  Gov- 
ernor thereon,  the  grant,  and  the  subsequent  approval  of  the 
Departmental  Assembly,  is  found  among  the  archives  of  the  former 
government,  and  the  genuineness  of  the  signatures  to  the  title 
issued  to  the  party  and  the  record  of  the  proceedings  of  the  Assem- 
bly is  also  established. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  69 

Feliz  V.  United  States. 

The  authenticity  of  these  documents  is  not  questioned  in  this  Court, 
nor  does  it  seem  to  have  been  in  any  way  impugned  before  the 
Board  of  Commissioners.  The  grant  bears  date  the  twenty-first 
of  May,  1844.  The  approval  of  the  Assembly  is  dated  the  twen- 
ty-second of  April,  1846. 

The  condition  of  the  grant,  requiring  the  grantee  to  build  a 
house  within  a  year  from  its  date,  does  not  appear  to  have  been 
strictly  complied  with.  But  there  was  no  denouncement  of  the 
land  under  the  former  government,  and  the  grant  was  confirmed 
by  the  Assembly,  notwithstanding  the  omission  to  comply  with  the 
condition.  A  house  seems  to  have  been  built,  and  the  land  stocked 
with  cattle,  horses,  etc.,  in  the  year  1846,  or  perhaps  in  the  begin- 
ning of  1847,  and  from  that  time  to  the  present  the  land  has  been 
in  the  peaceable  possession  of  the  appellee  and  those  claiming  under 
him. 

In  accordance  with  the  principles  laid  down  by  the  Supreme 
Court,  and  applied  by  us  in  recent  cases,  we  think  this  claim  should 
be  confirmed. 


FERNANDO  FELIZ,  claiming  the   Rancho   Sanel,  Appel- 
lant, vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

The  objections  to  the  validity  of  this  claim,  as  presented  to  the  Board  of  Land 
Commissioners,  removed  by  the  additional  evidence  taken  in  this  Court. 

Claim  for  four  square  leagues  of  land  in  Mendocino  county, 
rejected  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimant. 

Irving  &  Rose,  for  Appellant. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  was  rejected  by  the  Board  of  Commis- 
sioners for  want  of  proof  of  the  genuineness  of  the  grant,  and 
because  the  grant  itself  contained  no  description  of  the  land  to 
identify  it  or  enable  a  surveyor  to  determine  its  locality. 


70  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Feliz  V.  United  States. 

On  looking  at  the  evidence  before  the  Board,  we  find  no  proof 
even  of  the  signature  of  the  Governor  to  the  original  grant.  The 
expediente  from  the  archives  was  neither  produced  nor  accounted 
for,  but  the  evidence  was  confined  to  the  point  of  occupation  and 
cultivation  by  the  grantee. 

Since  the  appeal  has  been  taken,  evidence  of  the  genuineness  of 
the  signature  of  Governor  Micheltorena  has  been  offered,  and  a 
duly  certified  copy  of  the  expediente  on  file  in  the  archives  has 
been  offered  in  evidence  and  admitted  by  the  District  Attorney. 

In  the  original  grant  the  signature  of  the  Secretary  is  wanting, 
but  though  this  circumstance  might  suggest  a  doubt  as  to  the  genu- 
ineness of  the  document,  we  are  not  aware  that  the  signature  of  the 
Secretary  was  a  legal  requisite  to  grants  of  this  description.  The 
grant  was  made  on  the  ninth  of  November,  1844.  By  the  testi- 
mony of  James  Black  and  Jesus  Piila,  taken  in  this  Court,  it 
appears  that  the  claimant  in  the  spring  of  1845  was  living  on  his 
land,  and  that  in  August  of  that  year  he  had  built  a  house,  and  also 
had  a  garden,  a  corral,  and  had  cattle  upon  it.  This  testimony  is 
important,  not  only  as  showing  a  performance  of  the  conditions, 
but  tending  to  dissipate  whatever  doubts  might  otherwise  have  been 
entertained  as  to  the  authenticity  of  the  grant. 

The  objection  taken  by  the  Board  to  the  claim  for  want  of  proof 
as  to  its  genuineness  is  thus  obviated  by  the  additional  testimony 
taken  in  this  Court,  and  as  no  argument  has  been  offered,  or  sug- 
gestion made  to  the  contrary,  we  presume  that  no  doubt  is  enter- 
tained on  the  point  by  the  District  Attorney. 

The  second  ground  on  which  the  claim  was  rejected  by  the  Board, 
was  the  want  of  a  description  sufficient  to  indicate  the  granted 
premises. 

The  expediente  containing  the  map  referred  to  in  the  grant  has 
been  produced  in  this  Court,  as  already  mentioned. 

The  grant  describes  the  land  as  the  "  place  called  '  Sanel,'  its 
boundaries  being  the  '  Serranias  Altas '  and  the  river." 

By  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Pifia,  it  appears  that  the  place  called 
Sanel  is  well  known  ;  that  it  is  situated  on  Russian  river,  and 
derives  its  name  from  a  tribe  of  Indians  called  Sanel  Indians,  who 
live  there  and  have  a  rancheria  there.     The  witness,  on  being 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  71 

Feliz  V.  United  States. 

shown  the  map  in  the  expediente,  recognizes  it  as  being  a  map  of 

the  place  called  "  Sanel." 

James  Black  testifies  that  he  has  known  the  place  called  ''  Sanel" 
since  1842,  and  that  it  was  always  called  bj  that  name.  That  it 
is  the  name  of  a  valley,  and  that  every  body  in  that  vicinity  knows 
it  by  that  name,  and  that  it  has  always  been  so  known  since  he 
became  acquainted  with  it.  *The  witness  further  states  that  in  his 
opinion  a  surveyor  could,  by  the  aid  of  the  map,  locate  the  land 
thereon  designated  as  the  "  Terrene  que  se  solicita." 

Without  invoking,  therefore,  the  principles  decided  in  the  case 
of  Fremont,  we  think  we  are  justified  under  this  evidence  in  con- 
cluding that  the  designation  by  name  in  the  grant  of  the  tract 
granted,  with  its  boundaries,  and  the  delineation  on  the  map  taken 
together,  indicate  with  reasonable  certainty  and  precision  the  local- 
ity of  the  granted  land. 

No  doubt  as  to  the  performance  of  the  conditions  is  suggested. 
The  claimant  has  from  the  spring  of  the  year  succeeding  that  in 
which  he  obtained  the  grant,-  up  to  the  present  time,  continued  to 
reside  upon  and  cultivate  his  land ;  and  he  even  appears  to  have 
given  his  name  to  the  place,  for  in  the  engraved  map  of  the  mining 
region  of  California,  appended  to  the  deposition  of  Black,  the  name 
"  Feliz  "  appears,  and  is  identified  by  the  witness  as  the  name  of 
the  place  occupied  by  the  claimant. 

No  other  objections  than  those  already  considered  are  mentioned 
in  the  opinion  of  the  Board,  or  are  suggested  by  the  District 
Attorney.  We  think,  therefore,  that  this  claim  ought  to  be  con- 
firmed, to  the  extent  of  four  leagues,  if  that  quantity  shall  be 
found  within  the  boundaries  delineated  on  the  map  ;  and  if  the 
quantity  so  contained  shall  be  less  than  four  leagues,  then  that 
that  lesser  quantity  be  confirmed  to  him. 


72  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


United  States  v.  Greer. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  MARIA  LOUISA 
GREER  et  al,  claiming  the  Rancho  Canada  de  Raymundo. 

No  objections  urged  to  the  confirmation  of  this  claim. 

Claim  for  about  three  leagues  of  land  in  San  Mateo  county,  con- 
firmed by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Jeremiah  Clarke,  for  Appellees. 

No  argument  was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellants,  nor 
was  any  objection  suggested  to  the  validity  of  this  claim.  The 
transcript  has  been  submitted  to  the  Court  without  any  observations 
from  either  side. 

On  examining  the  decree  of  the  Commissioners,  it  appears  to  be 
sustained  by  the  evidence.  No  doubt  exists  as  to  the  genuineness 
of  the  grant  or  the  performance  of  the  conditions.  The  only  objec- 
tions which  can  be  urged  against  the  claim  are  the  want  of  a  judi- 
cial possession,  and  the  fact  that  the  land  is  within  the  ten  littoral 
leagues.  These  objections  have  heretofore  been  considered  and 
overruled.  There  seems,  therefore,  to  be  no  ground  for  reversing 
the  decree  of  the  Board.     The  claim  must  therefore  be  confirmed. 


SALVADOR  CASTRO,  claiming  the  Rancho  San  Gregorio, 
Appellant,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

Entitled  to  confirmation  under  the  decision  of  this   Court  in  case  number 
eighty-eight. 

Claim  for  one  league  of  land  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  rejected  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  claimant. 

Jeremiah  Clark,  for  Appellant. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  73 

Castro  V.  United  States. 

The  claimant  is  this  case  derives  his  title  from  a  grant  made  to 
Antonio  Buelna,  on  the  second  of  May,  1839.  This  grant  was 
also  the  foundation  of  the  title  claimed  in  case  number  eighty- 
eight,  already  decided  by  this  Court.  The  claim  in  that  case  was 
made  in  the  name  of  the  widow  and  heir  of  the  original  grantee, 
and  was  for  a  part  of  the  land  originally  granted.  The  remainder, 
which  is  the  subject  of  the  present  claim,  had  been  sold  to  Castro, 
the  claimant  in  this  case,  by  the  widow  of  Buelna.  The  convey- 
ances to  him  are  duly  produced  and  proved. 

Both  of  these  claims  were  rejected  by  the  Board,  on  the  ground 
that  there  was  no  proof  that  the  Maria  Concepcion  Valencia  Rod- 
riguez, the  claimant  in  case  number  eighty-eight,  was  the  grantor 
of  the  claimant  in  this  case,  and  the  widow  and  heir  of  the  original 
grantee. 

Case  number  eighty-eight  has  already  been  decided  by  this 
Court ;  the  original  grant  has  been  found  to  be  vahd,  and  the  claim 
of  Maria  Concepcion  Valencia  Rodriguez,  formerly  Buelna,  has 
been  confirmed  to  that  portion  of  the  land  still  retained  by  her. 

The  only  question,  then,  that  remains  is  whether  the  grantor  of 
the  claimant  in  this  case  is  the  same  person.  This  fact  is  admitted 
by  the  District  Attorney  in  a  stipulation  on  file  in  this  Court. 

The  original  grant  having  thus  been  declared  to  be  valid,  and 
the  right  of  the  grantor  of  the  claimant,  as  heir  of  the  original 
grantee,  having  been  also  judicially  recognized,  no  objection  can 
now  be  taken  to  the  confirmation  of  the  present  claim — the  vahdity 
of  the  conveyances  by  the  widow  Buelna  to  the  present  claimant 
not  being  disputed. 

A  decree  of  confirmation  must  therefore  be  entered  for  the  land 
as  described  and  bounded  iii  the  conveyances  to  the  claimant,  or  to 
so  much  thereof  as  is  comprised  within  the  hmits  of  the  original 
grant. 


74  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Sunol. 

THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  ANTONIO  SUNOL 
et  al,  CLAIMING  THE  Rancho  El  Valle  de  San  Jose. 

No  objection  made  bj  the  District  Attorney  to  the  confirmation  of  this  claim. 

Claim  for  a  tract  of  land,  supposed  to  contain  eleven  leagues,  in 
Alameda  county,  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the 
United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Crockett  &  Crittenden,  for  Appellees. 

The  validity  of  this  claim  was  proved  by  the  production  of  the 
original  grant  and  of  the  expediente  from  the  archives.  The 
expediente  also  shows  that  the  grant  was  registered  in  the  Secre- 
tary's office,  and  also,  by  order  of  the  Governor,  in  the  office  of 
the  Prefecture  of  the  first  district.  Both  the  expediente  and  the 
grant  produced  by  the  claimant  contain  the  certificate  of  registry, 
and  of  the  approval  of  the  grant  by  the  Departmental  Assembly. 

The  evidence  shows  a  substantial  compliance  with  the  conditions, 
and  the  boundaries  and  extent  of  the  granted  land  are  clearly 
indicated  by  the  description  in  the  grant  and  the  delineations  on 
the  map.  No  objection  to  the  confirmation  of  this  claim  having 
been  made  by  the  District  Attorney,  we  do  not  deem  it  necessary 
to  recapitulate  at  length  the  preliminary  proceedings  before  the 
Governor,  nor  to  refer  particularly  to  the  evidence  by  which  its 
validity  has  been  established. 

A  decree  affirming  the  decision  of  the  Board  must  therefore  be 
entered. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  THE  HEIRS  OF 
JUAN  REID,  CLAIMING  THE  Rancho  Corte  de  Madera  del 
Presidio. 

The  validity  of  this  claim  is  beyond  question. 

Claim  for  one  league  of  land  in  Marin  county,  confirmed  by  the 
Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  75 

United  States  v.  Heirs  of  Juan  Reid. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 
McDouGAL  &  Sharp,  for  Appellees. 

The  land  claimed  in  this  case  is  shown  to  have  been  granted  to 
Juan  Reid  by  Governor  Figueroa  on  the  second  of  October,  1834. 
The  original  title  is  produced,  and  the  signatures  duly  proved. 
The  expediente — a  traced  copy  of  which  is  filed  in  the  case — con- 
tains the  petition  on  which  the  grant  and  a  record  of  the  proceed- 
ings of  the  Territorial  Deputation  on  the  second  of  October,  1835, 
approving  the  concession  previously  made  by  the  Governor.  It  is 
also  shown  by  documentary  proof  that  judicial  possession  of  the 
granted  land  was  given  on  the  twenty-eighth  of  November,  1835. 

It  is  also  shown  that  previous  to  obtaining  the  grant,  and  subse- 
quently until  his  death,  the  grantee  resided  with  his  family  on  the 
land,  and  that  since  his  decease  his  family  have  continued  to  occupy 
the  land. 

The  case  seems  to  present  one  of  the  few  instances  where  every 
requirement  of  the  law  has  been  fully  complied  with. 

No  reason  is  perceived  by  the  Court  or  suggested  on  the  part  of 
the  appellants  for  refusing  to  confirm  the  claim. 

A  decree  must  therefore  be  entered  affirming  the  decision  of  the 
Board  of  Commissioners. 


THE    UNITED    STATES,  Appellants,    vs.    FRANCISCO 
LARKIN  et  al.^  claiming  the  Rancho  de  Larkin. 

No  objections  made  to  the  validity  of  this  claim. 

Claim  for  ten  leagues  of  land  in  Colusi  county,  confirmed  by  the 
Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Stanly  &  King,  for  Appellees. 


76  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COTJRT, 

United  States  v.  Larkin. 

This  case  was  unanimously  confirmed  by  the  Board  of  Commis- 
sioners. It  has  been  submitted  to  us  without  argument  or  the 
statement  of  any  objections  to  it  on  the  part  of  the  appellants. 

The  points  made  by  the  Law  Agent  before  the  Commissioners  are 
all  fully  considered  in  their  opinion  contained  in  the  transcript,  and 
we  deem  it  enough  to  say  that  we  see  no  reason  to  dissent  from  the 
conclusion  at  which  they  arrive. 

Of  the  genuineness  of  the  grant  there  can  be  no  question.  It 
was  approved,  as  the  Board  and  this  Court  consider,  in  an  unqualified 
manner  by  the  Departmental  Assembly,  and  the  conditions  have 
been  substantially  complied  with. 

The  description  in  the  grant  and  the  delineation  on  the  map, 
which  is  unusually  accurate,  indicate  unmistakeably  the  locality 
and  boundaries  of  the  granted  land  ;  and  the  decree  of  the  Com- 
missioners, which  w^e.  are  asked  to  affirm,  particularly  designates 
the  boundaries  of  the  tract,  the  title  to  which  is  confirmed  to  the 
claimants. 

A  decree  affirming  their  decision  must  be  entered  as  prayed  for 
by  the  claimants. 


THE   UNITED    STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  JOSE   MARIA 

AMADOR,   CLAIMING   PART   OF    THE   RaNCHO    SaN   RaMON. 
The  confirmation  of  this  claim  not  disputed. 

Claim  for  four  leagues  of  land  in  Alameda  county,  confirmed  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

E.  W.  F.  Sloan,  for  Appellee. 

The  Board  of  Commissioners  have  confirmed  this  claim  without 
suggesting  any  doubt  as  to  its  entire  vahdity. 

The  genuineness  of  the  grant  is  not  disputed,  and  it  appears  to 
have  been  approved  by  the  Departmental  Assembly.     The  condi- 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  77 

United  States  v.  Amador. 

tions  have  been  fully  complied  with,  and  the  premises  granted  have 
been  the  family  residence  of  the  grantee  from  a  period  prior  to  the 
issuing  of  the  grant,  and  he  has  continued  to  cultivate  and  improve 
his  land  down  to  the  present  time. 

A  part  of  his  land  has  been  conveyed  by  him  to  other  parties, 
and  he  now  asks  for  a  confirmation  of  his  claim  to  the  remainder. 
A  decree  to  that  effect  was  made  by  the  Board  of  Commissioners. 

A  decree  must  therefore  be  entered  in  this  Court  affirming  the 
decision  of  the  Board  and  confirming  the  claimant's  title  to  the 
extent  solicited. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  BERNARD  MUR- 
PHY, CLAIMING   THE   RaNCIIO   LaS   UvAS. 

No  objection  urged  to  the  confirmation  of  this  claim. 

Claim  for  three  leagues  of  land  in  Santa  Clara  county,  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Thornton  &  Williams,  for  Appellee. 

This  case  has  been  submitted  without  argument  on  the  part  of 
the  appellants  ;  nor  has  any  reason  for  reversing  the  decree  of  the 
Board  been  suggested  to  us. 

On  looking  over  the  record,  it  appears  that  the  genuineness  of 
the  original  grant  was  fully  established,  and  indeed  does  not  seem  to 
be  controverted  now. 

The  evidence  discloses  a  substantial  compHance  with  the  condi- 
tions of  the  grant,  and  the  boundaries  of  the  land  are  distinctly 
indicated  by  natural  objects.  The  land  thus  bounded  has  been 
found,  on  a  survey,  to  contain  less  than  the  quantity  called  for  in 
the  grant. 

We  are  unable  to  discover  any  reason  for  refusing  to  confirm  the 
decree  of  the  Commissioners. 

A  decree  to  that  effect  must  therefore  be  entered. 


78  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Horrell. 

THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  JOHNSON   HOR- 
RELL, CLAIMING  THE   RaNCHO   MuSALACON. 

No  reason  jDerceived  for  refusing  a  confirmation. 

Claim  for  two  leagues  of  land  in  Sonoma  county,  confirmed  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

R.  W.  Morrison,  for  Appellee. 

The  claimants  in  this  case  have  produced  the  original  grant  made 
by  Governor  Pio  Pico  to  Francisco  Berreyesa,  on  the  second  of 
May,  1846. 

The  expediente  is  in  the  archives  of  the  former  government,  and 
contains,  in  addition  to  the  usuual  documents,  the  record  of  the 
approval  of  the  concession  by  the  Departmental  Assembly  on  the 
third  of  June,  1846. 

No  doubt  is  suggested  as  to  the  genuineness  of  any  of  these 
documents. 

The  grantee  appears  within  the  year  prescribed  by  the  grant  to 
have  entered  into  the  possession  of  his  land,  and  to  have  resided  in 
a  wooden  house  built  by  him  upon  it.  He  also  placed  upon  it  cat- 
tle, and  commenced  its  cultivation. 

There  is  no  difficulty  in  identifying  and  locating  the  land  by 
means  of  the  description  in  the  grant  and  the  map  to  which  it  refers, 
and  which  is  contained  in  the  expediente. 

The  Commissioners  in  their  opinion  on  this  case  observe  "  that 
although  the  title  was  executed  but  a  short  time  before  the  Ameri- 
can occupation,  it  appears  to  have  been  made  in  good  faith  and 
with  due  regard  to  the  requirements  of  the  law." 

This  Court  perceives  no  ground  for  dilFering  from  the  Commis- 
sioners in  this  view  of  the  case. 

The  decision  of  the  Board  must  therefore  be  affirmed,  and  a 
decree  entered  accordingly. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  79 

United  States  v.  Thompson. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  SALVIO  PA- 

CHECO,  CLAIMING  THE   RaNCIIO   MoNTE   DEL   DiABLO. 

No  objections  to  the  confirmation  of  this  claim. 

Claim  for  four  leagues  of  land  in  Contra  Costa  county,  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

B.  W.  Leigh,  for  Appellee. 

In  this  case,  a  grant  from  Governor  Figueroa  to  the  claimant  is 
produced  and  proved,  and  evidence  is  offered  to  prove  the  occupa- 
tion and  cultivation  of  the  land  within  the  year,  as  prescribed  in 
the  grant.  In  the  opinion  of  the  Board  the  grant  is  treated  as 
undoubtedly  genuine,  and  the  fact  of  the  performance  of  the  con- 
ditions as  indisputable.  No  additional  testimony  has  been  taken 
in  this  Court,  nor  has  any  reason  for  refusing  the  decree  of  the 
Board  and  rejecting  the  claim  been  suggested  to  us  on  the  part  of 
the  appellants. 

The  only  objections  that  could  have  been  raised,  viz.,  the  want 
of  juridical  possession,  and  the  fact  that  the  land  is  within  the  ten 
littoral  leagues,  has  already  repeatedly  been  overruled. 

A  decree  confirming  the  claim  must  therefore  be  entered. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  JOS.  P.  THOMP- 
SON, CLAIMING   PART   OF   THE   RaNCHO   EnTRE-NaPA. 

No  objections  to  the  confirmation  of  this  claim. 

Claim  for  two  leagues  of  land  in  Napa  county,  confirmed  by  the 
Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Halleck,  Peachy  &  Billings,  for  Appellee. 


80  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Page. 

The  land  claimed  in  this  case  is  part  of  the  rancho  of  Entre- 
Napa,  originally  granted  to  Nicolas  Higuera  bj  Governor  Manuel 
Chico,  on  the  ninth  of  May,  1836. 

The  authenticity  of  the  grant  is  duly  proved,  and  the  expedients 
is  produced  from  the  archives  of  the  former  government. 

It  is  also  shown  that  the  grantee  occupied  the  land  the  same 
year  the  grant  was  made  ;  that  he  built  a  house  and  corrals  upon 
it ;  that  he  cultivated  a  part  of  it,  and  continued  to  live  on  it  until 
his  death,  in  1852.  Before  his  death  he  had  sold  a  portion  of  his 
land  to  the  present  claimant.  The  conveyances  to  the  latter  are 
produced  and  proven. 

It  is  also  shown  by  the  proper  documentary  eyidence  that  the 
grantee  applied  for  juridical  measurement,  and  that  the  same  was 
in  due  form  made,  and  possession  of  the  lands  with  defined  bound- 
aries given  to  the  grantee  on  the  eleventh  of  January,  1842. 

Under  these  circumstances,  no  reason  for  rejecting  the  claim  is 
perceived,  nor  has  any  been  stated  on  the  part  of  the  appellants. 

It  must  therefore  be  confirmed. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  THOMAS  S. 

PAGE,  CLAIMING   THE   RaNCHO   CoTATE. 
This  claim  not  resisted  by  the  United  States. 

Claim  for  four  leagues  of  land  in  Sonoma  county,  confirmed  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Thornton  &  Williams,  for  Appellee. 

In  this  case  the  original  grant  was  not  produced,  but  its  existence 
and  loss  are  proved  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt  by  the  depositions 
of  the  witnesses  and  the  production  of  the  expediente  from  the 
archives  containing  the  usual  documents,  and  also  a  certificate  of 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  81 

United  States  v.  Murphy. 

approval  by  the  Departmental  Assembly.  The  grant  is  also  men- 
tioned in  the  index  of  grants  by  the  former  government. 

No  doubt  was  entertained  by  the  Commissioners  as  to  the  suffi- 
ciency of  the  proofs  on  these  points,  nor  is  any  objection  raised  in 
this  Court  in  regard  to  them. 

The  evidence  discloses  a  full  compliance  with  the  conditions,  and 
the  description  in  the  grant  and  map  determines  its  locality.  No 
objection  is  raised  on  the  part  of  the  appellants  to  the  confirmation 
of  this  claim,  and  on  "^looking  over  the  transcript  w-e  have  not  per- 
ceived any  reason  to  doubt  its  entire  validity. 

The  decree  of  the  Board  must  therefore  be  affirmed. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  BERNARD  MUR- 
PHY, CLAIMING   THE   RaNCHO   La  PoLKA. 

The  validity  of  this  claim  fully  established. 

Claim  for  one  league  of  land  in  Santa  Clara  county,  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Thornton  &  Williams,  for  Appellee. 

It  is  unnecessary  in  this  case  to  recapitulate  the  facts,  which  are 
fully  stated  in  the  opinion  of  the  Board  of  Commissioners. 

The  genuineness  of  the  grant,  and  the  residence  of  the  grantee 
and  his  children  on  the  land  for  more  than  twenty  years,  are  fully 
estabhshed. 

The  only  difficulty  in  the  case  is  obviated  by  the  form  of  decree 
entered  by  the  Board,  and  which  it  is  now  prayed  may  be  affirmed 
by  this  Court. 

No  objections  having  been  raised  on  the  part  of  the  appellants, 
and  none  having  been  discovered  by  us,  a  decree  as  prayed  for 
must  be  entered. 


82  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Rodriguez, 

THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  v8,  ROBERT  H. 
THOMES,  CLAIMING  THE  Rancho  Saucos. 

The  validity  of  this  claim  undoubted. 

Claim  for  five  leagues  of  land  in  Colusi  county,  confirmed  by  the 
Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

E.  0.  Crosby,  for  Appellee. 

In  this  case  an  appeal  has  been  taken  on  the  part  of  the  United 
States,  but  no  reason  for  rejecting  the  claim  is  mentioned  by  the 
District  Attorney,  nor  do  there  seem,  on  examining  the  record,  to 
be  any  grounds  for  doubting  its  validity.  The  original  grant  is 
produced,  as  well  as  the  expediente  from  the  archives,  with  the 
record  of  approval  by  the  Departmental  Assembly.  The  conditions 
have  been  fully  comphed  with,  and  the  map  and  the  description  in 
the  petition  to  which  the  conditions  of  the  grant  refer  identify  the 
land. 

The  claim  of  the  appellee  must  therefore  be  confirmed. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  v%.  MARIA  CONCEP- 
CION  VALENCIA  DE  RODRIGUEZ  et  al.,  claiming  the 

Rancho  San  Francisquito. 

No  objection  to  this  claim  made  by  the  United  States. 

Claim  for  three-fourths  of  one  league  of  land  in  Santa  Clara 
county,  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  xippellants. 

Stanley  &  King,  for  Appellees. 

The  grant  in  this  case  was  made  on  the  first  day  of  May,  1839, 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  83 

United  States  v.  Thomes. 

bj  Governor  Alvarado,  to  Antonio  Buelna,  the  husband  of  the 
claimant.  Buelna,  after  obtaining  his  grant,  appears  bj  the  proofs 
to  have  occupied  and  cultivated  his  land  and  continued  to  hve  there 
with  his  family  until  his  decease.  The  present  claimant,  his  widow, 
seems  to  be  his  sole  heir. 

The  United  States  have  taken  an  appeal  in  this  case,  but  it  is 
submitted  to  us  as  usual  without  argument,  or  the  statement  of  any 
objection  to  the  validity  of  the  claim. 

The  genuineness  of  the  grant  seems  to  be  fully  proved,  and  the 
Board  have  confirmed  the  claim  according  to  a  judicial  measure- 
ment, which  on  a  resurvey  has  been  found  to  include  less  than  the 
quantity  mentioned  in  the  grant. 

We  think  the  decree  of  the  Board  should  be  affirmed. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  ALBERT  G. 
THOMES,  CLAiMiNa  the  Rancho  Rio  de  los  Molinos. 

The  validity  of  this  claim  undoubted. 

Claim  for  five  leagues  of  land  in  Butte  county,  confirmed  by  the 
Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

E.  0.  Crosby,  for  Appellees. 

No  additional  testimony  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  has 
been  taken  in  this  Court,  nor  has  any  reason  for  reversing  the  de- 
cision of  the  Board  been  suggested — the  case  having  been  sub- 
mitted on  both  sides  without  argument. 

On  looking  into  the  transcript  we  find  the  genuineness  of  the 
original  title  fully  established  by  proof.  The  expediente  is  duly 
produced  from  the  archives,  containing  the  petition  and  usual  doc- 
uments, and  also  the  approval  of  the  Departmental  Assembly. 

The  conditions  of  the  grant  seem  to  have  been  substantially  com- 


84  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Wilson. 

plied  with,  and  the  locaUtj  of  the  land  is  indicated  with  great  pre- 
cision by  the  descriptions  in  the  grant  and  petition,  and  the  deline- 
ations on  the  map  which  is  found  in  the  expediente. 
The  decree  of  the  Board  must  therefore  be  affirmed. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  JUAN  WILSON, 

CLAIMING   THE    RaNCHO    GuILICOS. 
The  description  of  the  Und  granted  is  sufficient,  aided  by  the  diseno. 

Claim  for  a  tract  of  land,  supposed  to  contain  four  leagues,  in 
Sonoma  county,  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the 
United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

B.  S.  Brooks,  for  Appellee. 

The  claim  in  this  case  was  confirmed  by  the  Board.  No  doubt 
is  suggested  as  to  the  authenticity  of  the  documentary  evidence 
submitted,  and  the  only  point  upon  which  a  question  was  made  was 
whether  the  grant  and  map  accompanying  it  sufficiently  indicate 
the  granted  land  —  there  being  no  designation  of  the  quantity  or 
number  of  leagues  in  the  original  grant. 

The  grant  bears  date  on  the  thirteenth  of  November,  1839,  but 
was  not  issued  until  the  twentieth.  The  signature  of  the  Governor 
to  the  original  grant  is  fully  proved,  and  the  expediente  produced 
from  the  archives  containing  the  proceedings  upon  the  petition,  the 
various  orders  of  the  Governor,  and  the  decree  of  approval  by  the 
Departmental  Assembly. 

The  requirements  of  the  regulations  of  1828  seem  to  have  been 
substantially  comphed  with,  and  the  land  cultivated  and  inhabited 
within  a  reasonable  time. 

With  regard  to  locating  the  tract,  there  seems  to  be  no  difficulty. 
The  grant  describes  it  as  the  parcel  of  land  known  by  the  name  of 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  85 

Brackctt  v.  United  States. 

"  Gailicos,"  within  the  boundaries  shown  in  the  map  which  accom- 
panies the  petition.  On  inspecting  the  map,  those  boundaries 
appear  to  be  indicated  with  tolerable  certainty,  and  it  is  presumed 
that  by  means  of  it  no  practical  difficulty  will  be  found  by  the  sur- 
veyor in  laying  off  to  the  claimant  his  land. 

A  decree  of  confirmation  must  therefore  be  entered. 


JOSHUA   S,   BRACKETT,  claiming  part  of  the   Rancho 
SouLAJULLE,  Appellant,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

Objection  removed  by  testimon}'-  taken  in  this  Court. 

Claim  for  a  half-league  of  land  in  Marin  county,  rejected  by  the 
Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimant. 

William  Blanding,  for  Appellant. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  is  for  a  part  of  the  Rancho  of  Soulajulle, 
originally  granted  by  Governor  Micheltorena  to  Ramon  Mesa. 
Various  other  claims  have  also  been  made  for  other  portions  of  the 
same  Rancho,  and  the  testimony  in  this  case  is  by  stipulation  agreed 
to  be  used  in  those  cases  as  if  specially  taken  and  filed  in  each. 

This  claim  was  rejected  by  the  Board,  not  on  the  ground  of  the 
invalidity  of  the  original  title,  but  because  it  did  not  appear  from 
the  mesne  conveyances  that  the  land  claimed  was  a  part  of  the 
original  tract  granted  to  Ramon  Mesa. 

The  further  evidence  taken  in  this  Court  removes  that  objection, 
and  the  only  question  that  remains  to  be  decided  is  as  to  the  valid- 
ity of  the  original  grant. 

The  title  given  to  the  interested  party  is  produced,  and  although 
the  evidence  of  the  signatures  of  the  Governor  is  not  as  satisfactory 
as  could  have  been  wished,  or  as  we  had  a  right  to  expect  from 
the  facility  with  which  Micheltorena's  and   Jimeno's  signatures 


86  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Cambuston. 

could  at  any  moment  be  proved  in  this  city,  yet  as  no  opposing  tes- 
timony is  offered  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  I  am  inclined 
to  agree  with  the  Board  in  considering  it  sufficient,  taken  with  the 
other  testimony  in  the  case,  to  establish  the  authenticity  of  the  grant. 
Had  the  District  Attorney  or  law  agent  entertained  any  doubt  of 
the  genuineness  of  the  grant,  it  is  but  reasonable  to  suppose  that 
evidence  would  have  been  offered  to  show  that  the  signatures  affixed 
to  the  title  of  the  grantee  were  forgeries.  The  illiterate  character 
of  the  witness  himself  repels  the  idea  that  he  could  have  forged 
4he  document,  and  no  other  person  concerned  in  such  a  fraud  would 
have  trusted  the  proof  of  its  genuineness  to  the  vague  and  unsatis- 
factory testimony  of  such  a  witness.  But  the  strongest  testimony 
in  confirmation  of  the  claim  is  found  in  the  facts  that  the  expediente 
is  found  in  and  duly  produced  from  the  archives,  and  that  the 
grantee  has  occupied  and  cultivated  his  land  from  the  time  of  his 
grant  until  the  time  he  sold  it  to  the  various  claimants  now  before 
this  Court. 

The  conditions  of  the  grant  having  thus  been  complied  with,  and 
the  grant  itself  appearing  to  be  genuine,  there  is  no  obstacle  to  the 
confirmation  of  the  present  claim,  or  to  so  much  thereof  as  may  be 
included  within  the  limits  of  the  original  grant. 


THE   UNITED    STATES,  Appellants,  vs.   HENRY   CAM- 
BUSTON, CLAIMING  ELEVEN  SQUAKE  LEAGUES  OP  LAND. 

No  opposition  to  the  confirmation  of  this  claim. 

Claim  for  eleven  leagues  of  land  in  Butte  county,  confirmed  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

YoLNEY  E.  Howard,  for  Appellee. 

The  original  grant  in  this  case  is  not  produced,  but  it  is  shown  to 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  87 

Dana  v.  United  States. 

have  been  in  the  possession  of  the  grantee  in  the  year  1850,  when 
it  was  deposited  by  him  in  the  government  archives,  where  it  still 
remains. 

A  traced  copy  is,  however,  filed  ;  and  the  genuineness  of  the 
original  fully  established  by  proof. 

It  appears  in  evidence  that  efforts  to  occupy  the  land  were  made 
by  the  grantee  within  the  year,  and  that  in  1847  he  had  built  a 
house,  stocked  his  rancho,  and  cultivated  a  portion  of  it  under  the 
superintendence  of  his  mayor  domo. 

The  exterior  boundaries  of  the  tract  are  sufficiently  indicated  in 
the  grant,  and  the  quantity  of  land  to  be  taken  within  those  bound- 
aries is  mentioned  as  eleven  leagues,  if  so  much  can  be  found  out- 
side of  the  lands  of  the  neighbors,  whose  lines  are  to  be  respected. 

The  Commissioners  have  confirmed  this  claim,  and  although  the 
absence  of  the  expediente  containing  the  petition  and  other  pro- 
ceedings prior  to  the  grant  prevents  the  proof  in  this  case  from 
being  of  so  conclusive  character  as  in  many  others,  yet  the  Board 
does  not  seem  to  have  entertained  any  doubt  as  to  its  genuineness, 
nor  has  the  claim  been  opposed  in  this  Court  in  any  argument  on 
the  part  of  the  United  States.  It  has  been  submitted  to  us  for 
decision  without  comment,  and  though  we  would  have  desired  fuller 
proofs  on  the  subject,  we  do  not  feel  at  liberty  to  disregard  the 
uncontradicted  e«v^idence  which  establishes  the  genuineness  of  the 
grant. 

The  claim  must  therefore  be  confirmed. 


WILLIAM  A.  DANA   et  al.,  claiming  part  of  tpie  Rancho 
San  Antonio,  Appellants,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

Objections  removed  by  further  testimony  taken  in  this  Court. 

Claim  for  about  six  thousand  acres  of  land  in  Santa  Clara  county, 
rejected  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimants. 

Jeremiah  Clarke,  for  Appellants. 


U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


Dana  v.  United  States. 


S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claimants  in  this  case  derive  their  title  from  a  grant  made 
bj  Governor  Alvarado  on  the  twenty-sixth  of  March,  1839,  and 
confirmed  by  the  Departmental  Assembly  on  the  twenty-sixth  of 
May,  1840. 

The  nonproduction  of  the  original  grant  is  accounted  for  by  the 
depositions  of  various  witnesses  taken  in  case  number  two  hund- 
red and  seventy-five,  and  by  stipulation  made  evidence  in  this 
case  :  and  a  copy  has  been  introduced,  duly  certified  by  Manuel 
Jimeno  and  two  assisting  witnesses  as  true  and  legal,  from  the 
original  expediente  in  the  office  of  the  Secretary.  This  certificate 
is  dated  October  14th,  1843. 

A  certificate  signed  by  Manuel  Micheltorena,  Governor,  and 
M.  Jimeno,  Secretary,  dated  October  12th,  1843,  is  also  produced, 
from  which  it  appears  that  the  grant  was  confirmed  by  the  Depart- 
mental Assembly  on  the  twenty-sixth  of  May,  1841.  It  also 
directs  that  this  certificate  be  delivered  to  the  interested  party  in 
confirmation  of  his  grant. 

A  copy  of  the  expediente  from  the  archives  is  also  produced, 
containing  the  original  petition  and  disefio  of  the  land  solicited  and 
the  subsequent  proceedings  thereon,  including  the  decree  of  con- 
cession, the  approval  of  the  Departmental  Assembly,  the  Governor's 
certificate  in  confirmation  of  the  grant,  and  a  copy  of  the  title 
dehvered  to  the  grantee. 

The  authenticity  and  genuineness  of  these  documents  are  fully 
estabhshed  by  proof. 

The  conditions  of  the  grant  appear  to  have  been  fully  comphed 
with,  and  the  description  in  the  grant  and  the  delineation  of  the 
tract  on  the  diseno  identify  the  land  with  sufficient  certainty. 

The  claim  in  this  case  was  rejected  by  the  Board  of  Commission- 
ers for  defect  in  the  chain  of  mesne  conveyances,  through  which  the 
claimants  derive  their  title.  Those  defects  have  since  been  sup- 
plied, and  the  title  of  the  claimants  seem  to  be  regularly  deduced 
from  the  original  grantee. 

With  respect  to  the  original  grant,  there  seems  to  be  no  contro- 
versy.    Its  validity  was  not  doubted  by  the  Board,  and  it  has  been 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  89 

United  States  v.  Peralta. 

confirmed  in  another  case  now  before  this  Court.  But  the  claim 
in  the  present  case  is  for  a  certain  part  of  the  tract  originally 
granted,  which  is  alleged  to  have  been  sold  after  the  decease  of 
the  grantee  by  his  executor  to  pay  his  debts.  A  deed  from  the 
heirs  of  the  grantee  is  also  produced,  conveying  to  the  purchaser 
the  same  land  bought  by  him  at  the  sale  by  the  executor. 

The  present  claimants  have  thus  shown  a  prima  facie  right  to 
the  land  petitioned  for,  and  as  it  is  clear  that  the  United  States 
have  no  rights  in  the  land  as  part  of  the  public  domain,  we  consider 
it  our  duty  to  confirm  this  claim  and  to  leave  the  parties  to  litigate 
between  themselves  any  questions  which  may  arise  as  to  the  valid- 
ity of  the  executor's  sale  or  the  conveyance  by  the  heirs  of  the 
original  grantee.  The  decree  of  this  Court  can  have  no  eifect  upon 
the  conflicting  rights  of  third  parties,  and  merely  determines  the 
vahdity  of  the  claim  as  against  the  United  States. 

The  elaborate  and  conclusive  argument  of  Mr.  Commissioner 
Thornton,  on  the  right  of  contesting  claimants  to  intervene  in  a  suit 
before  the  Board,  relieves  us  from  the  necessity  of  discussing  the 
question  involved  in  this  case,  especially  as  no  opposition  is  made 
to  the  confirmation  of  this  claim  on  the  part  of  any  persons  holding 
adverse  titles  to  the  land. 

The  claim  must  therefore  be  confirmed  to  so  much  of  the  land 
petitioned  for  as  is  contained  within  the  boundaries  of  the  tract 
granted  to  Prado  Mesa. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  SEBASTIAN  PE- 
RALTA   et   al.,    CLAIMING   THE     RaNCHO    RiNCONADA    DE    LOS 

Gatos. 

The  validity  of  tliis  claim  fully  established. 

Claim  for  one  league  and  a  half  of  land  in  Santa  Clara  county, 
confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 
7 


90  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Cazares. 

A.  p.  Crittenden,  for  Appellees. 

The  grant  under  which  this  claim  is  made  was  issued  by  Gover- 
nor Alvarado  on  the  twentieth  of  May,  1840.  The  original  title 
is  produced,  and  the  signatures  fully  proved,  and  also  a  certificate 
of  approval  by  the  Departmental  Assembly. 

The  land  seems  to  have  been  occupied  prior  to  the  grant,  and  a 
house  was  built  in  which  the  parties  have  ever  since  continued  to 
reside. 

The  land  granted  is  described  as  the  "Rinconada  de  los  Gates," 
and  the  third  condition  limits  the  quantity  to  one  league  and  a  half, 
as  shown  on  the  map.  On  recurring  to  the  map,  we  find  the  tract 
solicited  indicated  with  tolerable  precision,  and  sufficiently  so  to 
enable  a  surveyor  to  locate  it  without  difficulty. 

The  claim  was  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  we  think  their  decis- 
ion should  be  affirmed. 


THE  UNITED   STATES,  Appellants,  vs,  ANTONIA  CA- 
ZARES,   CLAIMING    THE    RaNCHO    CaNADA    DE    POGOLOME. 

The  validity  of  this  claim  not  doubted. 

Claim  for  two  leagues  of  land  in  Marin  county,  confirmed  by  the 
Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Halleck,  Peachy  &  Billings,  for  Appellee. 

It  appears  from  the  documentary  evidence  in  this  case  that 
James  Dawson,  the  deceased  husband  of  the  present  claimant,  on 
the  twenty-seventh  of  December,  1837,  presented  a  petition  to  the 
Commanding  General,  setting  forth  that  he,  together  with  Mcintosh 
and  one  James  Black,  had  obtained  a  grant  for  the  place  called 
"  La  Punta  del  Estero  del  Americano  ;  "  that  he  had  built  a  house 
upon  it,  and  planted  a  large  vineyard  and  an  orchard  with  more 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  91 

United  States  v.  Cazares. 

than  two  hundred  fruit  trees,  and  had  placed  upon  it  cattle,  horses, 
&c.  He  further  represented  that  the  grant  ^^^  h^Qn  obtained  in 
partnership  with  the  two  persons  mentioned,  but  that  Mcintosh 
was  attempting  to  eject  him.  He  therefore  prayed  that  he  might 
be  protected  in  his  rights. 

The  petitioner,  though  he  had  long  resided  in  the  country,  does 
not  appear  to  have  been  naturahzed  at  the  time  of  making  this 
petition,  but  the  documents  show  that  letters  of  naturalization  were 
obtained  by  him  on  the  twenty-ninth  of  December,  1841. 

On  the  eighteenth  of  September,  1843,  he  renewed  his  applica- 
tion to  be  put  in  possession  of  the  land,  and  the  Governor  to  whom 
this  second  petition  was  addressed  referred  it  to  the  Secretary  for 
information.  By  the  report  of  that  officer  it  appears,  that  although 
the  petition  for  the  land  had  been  in  the  name  of  the  three  appli- 
cants, yet  the  grant  had  been  made  to  Mcintosh  solely,  as  he  alone 
possessed  the  essential  requisite  of  being  a  naturalized  Mexican 
citizen.  The  Secretary  therefore  suggests  that  although  the  re- 
quest of  Dawson  cannot  be  granted,  yet  inasmuch  as  he  had  since 
been  naturalized,  and  had  married  a  Mexican  woman,  his  applica- 
tion for  another  piece  of  land  should  be  favorably  considered. 

The  Governor,  in  accordance  with  this  suggestion,  on  the  twenty- 
first  of  October,  1843,  ordered  the  proceedings  to  be  returned  to 
the  party  interested  for  his  information.  It  is  presumed  that  it 
was  in  this  way  that  these  documents  came  into  the  parties'  pos- 
session, and  are  not  now  found  among  the  archives. 

It  does  not  appear  that  Dawson  petitioned  for  a  grant  before  his 
death,  which  occurred  very  soon  after ;  but  a  grant  is  produced  in 
which  it  is  recited  that  his  widow,  the  present  claimant,  having  suf- 
ficiently proved  the  right  of  her  deceased  husband  to  petition  for 
the  land  which  she  then  occupied,  and  in  consideration  of  the  great 
losses  sustained  by  her  husband  on  separating  himself  from 
Mcintosh,  and  the  favorable  reports,  &c.,  the  Governor  grants  to 
her  the  land  solicited,  known  by  the  name  of  the  "  Canada  de 
Pogolome,"  to  the  extent  of  two  square  leagues,  a  little  more  or 
less. 

It  is  this  land  which  is  now  claimed  by  the  appellee.  This  grant 
was  issued  on  the  twelfth  of  February,  1844,  and  it  appears  to  have 


92  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Heirs  of  Bale. 

been  approved  by  the  Departmental  Assembly  on  the  twenty-sixth 
of  September,  1845. 

The  genuineness  of  the  above  documents  is  fully  proved  ;  and  it 
is  also  shown  that  the  land  was  long  occupied  by  Dawson  before  his 
decease,  and  since  then  by  the  present  claimant. 

Although  the  expediente  for  this  grant  is  not  among  the  archives, 
yet,  as  observed  by  the  Commissioners,  "  its  notoriety,  the  long  pos- 
session, and  the  circumstances  surrounding  it,  reheve  it  from  any 
suspicion  of  fraud  or  forgery." 

The  boundaries,  as  well  as  the  extent  of  the  land,  are  specified 
in  the  grant,  and  indicated  with  evident  precision  on  the  map  to 
which  it  refers. 

We  think,  therefore,  that  the  claim  is  valid  and  ought  to  be  con- 
firmed. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  THE  HEIRS  OF 
EDWARD  A.  BALE,  Deceased,  claiming  the  Rancho 
Carne  Humana. 

No  objection  to  this  claim  urged  by  the  United  States. 

Claim  for  four  leagues  of  land  in  Napa  county,  confirmed  by  the 
Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Halleck,  Peachy  &  Billings,  for  Appellees. 

It  appears  from  the  expediente  in  this  case  that  Edward  A.  Bale 
on  the  fourteenth  of  March,  1841,  petitioned  Governor  Alvarado 
for  a  tract  of  land  in  Sonoma,  and  appended  to  his  petition  a  report 
of  the  Commanding  General  showing  the  land  to  be  vacant. 

The  application  to  the  Commanding  General  and  his  marginal 
order  thereon  are  found  in  the  expediente,  from  which  it  appears 
that  the  land  asked  for  was  called  by  the  Indians  "  HuiHc  Noma." 
This  application  is  dated  Sept.  12th,  1840,  and  the  Commanding 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  93 

United  States  v.  Heirs  of  Bale. 

General,  by  his  marginal  order,  gives  permission  to  the  applicant 
to  occupy  the  land,  directing  him  to  petition  the  Pohtical  Chief  for 
the  corresponding  title. 

In  the  petition  to  the  Governor,  made  in  pursuance  of  this  order, 
the  name  of  the  land  is  not  given,  and  the  petitioner  promises  to 
present  a  map  of  the  tract  solicited. 

In  the  order  of  concession  by  the  Governor,  the  land  is  called 
"  Huilic  Noma,"  and  the  corresponding  title  is  ordered  to  be 
issued  to  the  party.  In  the  draft  of  this  title,  found  in  the  ex- 
pediente  and  dated  March  14th,  1851,  the  land  is  designated  by 
the  same  name.  But  in  the  formal  document  dehvered  to  the 
grantee,  which  bears  date  on  the  twenty-third  of  June,  1841,  the 
land  is  called  "  Carne  Humana,"  and  the  boundaries  are  designated 
with  more  particularity,  and  apparently  in  conformity  with  the  map 
which  accompanies  the  expediente.  The  grant  does  not  allude  to 
this  map,  but  it  is  most  probable,  as  supposed  by  the  Board,  that 
the  map  which  the  petitioner  promised  to  present  had  been  fur- 
nished in  the  interval  between  the  fourteenth  of  May,  the  date  of 
the  order  of  concession  and  the  draft  of  the  title  in  the  expediente, 
and  the  twenty-third  of  June,  the  date  on  which  the  formal  title 
was  executed  to  the  grantee.  There  seems  no  reason  to  doubt 
that  the  land  petitioned  for  and  conceded  on  the  fourteenth  of  May 
is  the  same  as  that  for  which  the  title  issued  on  the  twenty-third  of 
June. 

It  appears  in  proof  that  the  grantee  occupied  the  land  called 
''  Carne  Humana  "  as  early  as  1838  ;  that  he  built  a  house  on  it, 
cultivated  a  considerable  portion  of  it,  and  continued  to  reside  on 
it  until  his  death.  His  family  was  hving  upon  it  at  the  time  the 
depositions  were  taken  before  the  Board. 

It  further  appears,  that  judicial  possession  was  given  to  Bale  on 
the  eleventh  and  twelfth  of  September,  1845,  with  the  usual  form- 
alities required  by  the  Mexican  laws.  This  fact  is  estabhshed  by 
the  evidence  of  the  Alcalde,  and  the  colindantes  who  ojfficiated 
on  the  occasion — the  records  of  the  proceedings,  which  had  been 
deposited  in  the  Alcalde's  office  at  Sonoma,  being  shown  to  have 
been  destroyed  at  the  time  the  office  was  taken  possession  of  by  the 
"  Bear  Flag  "  party. 


94  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Heirs  of  Guerrero. 

The  genuineness  of  the  signatures  to  the  original  document  is 
proved.  The  claim  was  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  has  been 
submitted  to  us  without  argument,  or  the  statement  of  any  objec- 
tion on  the  part  of  the  United  States  to  its  confirmation.  We  see 
no  reason  to  doubt  its  validity,  and  think  a  decree  of  confirmation 
must  therefore  be  entered. 

The  transcript  in  this  case  contains  several  petitions  of  interven- 
tion by  different  parties,  claiming  portions  of  the  land  originally 
granted  to  Bale,  under  various  conveyances.  The  Board,  in 
accordance  with  its  decision  in  case  No.  2  on  their  docket,  have  not 
attempted  to  adjudicate  upon  the  conflicting  titles  of  these  claim- 
ants, and  have  merely  affirmed  the  validity  of  the  original  grant, 
leaving  the  adverse  titles  of  the  heirs  and  other  claimants  under 
the  original  grant  to  be  litigated  before  the  ordinary  tribunals. 

No  appearance  in  this  Court  has  been  entered,  except  on  behalf 
of  the  original  claimants  before  the  Board  ;  nor  is  any  objection 
made  to  an  affirmation  of  the  decree  of  the  Board  in  its  present 
form,  except  that  in  this  case,  as  in  all  cases  of  claims  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  an  appeal  has  been  taken  on  the  part  of  the  United 
States. 

We  think,  therefore,  that  the  decree  of  the  Board  should  be 
affirmed. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  THE  HEIRS  OF 
FRANCISCO  GUERRERO,  claiming  the  Rancho  Corral 

DE    TiERRA. 

The  validity  of  this  claim  fully  established. 

Claim  for  a  league  and  three-fourths  of  land  in  San  Francisco 
county,  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United 
States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Halleck,  Peachy  &  Billings,  for  Appellees. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  95 

United  States  v.  Heirs  of  Guerrero. 

It  appears  from  the  expediente  on  file  in  the  archives  that  on  the 
eighth  of  December,  1838,  the  grantee  petitioned  Governor  Al- 
varado  for  the  place  called  "  Corral  de  Tierra,"  of  the  extent  of 
one  and  a  half  leagues  long  and  three-fourths  of  a  league  wide. 
After  the  usual  informes  or  reports  from  the  officers  to  whom  the 
petition  was  referred,  the  Governor  ad  interim^  M.  Jimeno,  on  the 
sixteenth  of  October,  1839,  made  a  concession  of  the  land  as 
solicited,  but  of  the  extent  of  only  one  square  league.  And  the 
expediente  having  been  sent  to  the  Departmental  Assembly,  it  was 
bj  that  body  approved  on  the  twenty-second  of  May,  1840. 

In  April,  1842,  the  grantee  presented  another  petition  to 
Micheltorena,  the  then  Governor,  soliciting  an  extension  or 
additional  grant  of  a  small  piece  of  land,  about  three-fourths  of  a 
league,  lying  between  the  rancho  of  El  Corral  de  Tierra  and  that 
of  Tiburcio  Vasquez.  After  the  usual  references  for  information, 
the  Governor,  on  the  first  of  May,  1844,  ordered  the  title  to  issue. 
And  the  title  bearing  that  date  is  produced  by  the  claimants,  as 
also  that  previously  obtained  for  one  square  league.  After  receiv 
ing  the  second  grant,  the  grantee,  on  the  second  of  April,  1841, 
petitioned  the  Departmental  Assembly  for  its  confirmation,  and  the 
expediente  contains  a  favorable  report  of  the  committee  on  vacant 
lands,  to  which  it  was  referred,  dated  June  9th,  1846.  The  ex- 
pediente contains  no  evidence  of  the  final. passage  of  the  resolution 
of  approval  as  reported  by  the  committee,  but  the  original  title  pro- 
duced by  the  claimant  has  attached  to  it  the  usual  certificate  of 
approval  by  the  Departmental  Assembly  on  the  twelfth  of  June, 
and  signed  by  the  Governor,  Pio  Pico,  and  Jose  Matias  Moreno, 
Secretary. 

The  genuineness  of  the  documents  produced  by  the  claimants  is 
established  by  proof,  and  is  corroborated  by  the  production  of  the 
expediente,  and  by  the  notorious  and  continued  occupation  of  the 
land  by  the  grantee  and  his  family  since  1839,  the  date  of  his 
first  grant. 

We  see  no  reason  to  doubt  the  entire  validity  of  this  claim,  and 
we  think  it  should  be  confirmed. 

A  decree  affirming  the  decision  of  the  Board  must  therefore  be 
entered. 


96  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


United  States  v.  Carrillo. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  JOAQUIN  CAR- 
RILLO,  CLAIMING   THE   RaNCHO   LlANO   DE    SaNTA   RoSA. 

No  reason  for  doubting  the  entire  validity  of  this  claim. 

Claim  for  three  leagues  of  land  in  Sonoma  county,  confirmed  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Halleck,  Peachy  &  Billings,  for  Appellee. 

It  appears  from  the  expediente  in  this  case  that  the  claimant,  on 
the  twenty-second  of  June,  1843,  petitioned  Governor  Micheltor- 
ena  for  a  grant  of  land  on  the  plain  adjoining  the  rancho  of  his 
mother.  The  Governor,  however,  suspended  action  on  the  subject, 
as  no  judicial  measurement  had  been  made  of  the  adjoining  ranches, 
and  the  extent  of  the  sobrante  or  surplus  reserved  was  not  ascer- 
tained. 

On  the  twelfth  of  March,  1844,  the  claimant  apphed  to  the 
Alcalde  of  the  district  for  permission  to  sow,  and  build  a  house 
upon  the  land,  during  the  pendency  [of  his  application  to  the  Gov- 
ernor for  a  grant.  The  Alcalde  granted  him  leave  to  sow  the  land, 
holding  himself  responsible  to  the  owners  of  the  lands  if  there 
should  be  any  damage,  but  he  refused  him  permission  to  build  the 
house. 

On  the  twenty-sixth  of  March,  1844,  the  claimant  renewed  his 
appHcation  to  the  Governor,  stating  that  his  petition  still  remained 
unacted  upon  on  account  of  the  neglect  of  the  colindantes  or  ad- 
joining proprietors  to  have  their  lands  measured  according  to  law. 

The  Secretary,  to  whom  this  second  petition  was  referred,  report- 
ed favorably  to  it,  and  advised  a  grant  of  not  more  than  three 
square  leagues,  subject  to  the  measurements  of  the  adjoining  pro- 
prietors. 

In  accordance  with  this  report,  the  grant  now  produced  was 
made  ;  and  it  appears  in  evidence  that  he  built  first  a  small  house 
and  afterwards  a  very  large  one  on  the  land,  on  which  he  has  con- 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  97 

United  States  v.  Heirs  of  Guerrero. 

tinued  ever  since  to  reside.  He  has  also  cultivated  from  one  to 
three  hundred  acres  of  it  with  corn,  barley,  wheat,  &c. 

The  handwriting  of  the  grant  in  the  possession  of  the  party  is 
fully  proved,  and  there  seems  no  reason  to  doubt  the  entire  validity 
of  this  claim.  The  map  and  the  designation  in  the  grant  of  the 
colindantes  or  conterminous  owners  abundantly  show  the  locality  of 
the  tract  granted  ;  and  the  claimant's  title  to  the  land  solicited 
must  be  confirmed  to  the  extent  of  three  leagues,  subject  to  the 
measurement  of  the  land  previously  granted  to  the  colindantes. 

The  decision  of  the  Board  must,  therefore,  be  affirmed. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  THE  HEIRS  OF 
ERANCISCO  GUERRERO  PALOMARES,  claixMIng  a  Lot 
IN  THE  Mission  Dolores. 

The  validity  of  this  claim  not  contested. 

Claim  for  a  lot  four  hundred  varas  square  in  San  Francisco 
county,  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Halleck,  Peachy  &  Billings,  for  Appellees. 

It  appears  from  the  documentary  evidence  in  this  case  that  Gov- 
ernor Figueroa's  order,  dated  March  5th,  1835,  directed  the  Com- 
missioner of  San  Solano  to  furnish  to  such  individuals  of  the  colony 
as  might  desire  to  remove  and  estabhsh  themselves  elsewhere,  the 
necessary  assistance  to  pass  the  bay,  and  to  report  to  the  Govern- 
ment the  persons  who  might  do  so,  with  their  places  of  destination. 

On  the  fourth  of  November,  1836,  Francisco  Guerrero  peti- 
tioned Gov.  Gutierrez,  who  had  succeeded  Figueroa,  for  a  piece  of 
land  near  the  Mission,  and  referred  to  the  previous  order  of  Fig- 
ueroa allowing  a  settlement  on  any  land  that  might  be  selected. 

This  petition  was  referred  to  the  Administrator  of  the  Mission  of 
San  Francisco,  by  whom  a  favorable  report  was  made,  and  the  Gov- 


98  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

De  Zaldo  v.  United  States 

ernor,  on  the  thirtieth  of  May,  1836,  granted  to  Guerrero  the  four 
hundred  varas  solicited  according  to  his  petition. 

The  signatures  of  the  documents  are  proved  to  be  those  of  the 
officers  by  whom  they  purport  to  have  been  signed,  and  it  is  further 
proved  that  the  grantee  almost  immediately  after  went  upon  his 
land,  built  a  house  upon  it,  fenced  it  and  converted  it  into  a  garden 
— it  having  been  before  marshy  and  unoccupied.  The  grantee  and 
his  family,  the  present  claimants,  continued  to  reside  upon  it  until 
his  death  in  1851. 

No  objections  to  this^grant  are  made  on  the  part  of  the  United 
States.  It  was  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  we  see  no  reason  for 
reversing  their  decision. 

The  title -of  the  claimants  must  therefore  be  confirmed. 


ELIZABETH  DE  ZALDO,  CLAmmG  a  Lot  in  the  Mission 
Dolores,  Appellant,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

Objection  removed  by  further  testimony  in  tliis  Court. 

Claim  for  a  lot  fifty  varas  square  in  San  Francisco  county,  re- 
jected by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimant. 

Stanly  &  King,  for  Appellant. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  is  for  a  fifty  vara  lot  in  the  former  Mission 
of  Dolores.  It  is  founded  on  a  grant  by  Francisco  Sanchez,  Jus- 
tice of  the  Peace,  to  one  Carlos  Moreno  or  Charles  Brown. 

The  genuineness  of  the  grant  and  the  dehvery  of  possession  to 
the  grantee  are  fully  proven. 

The  claim  was  rejected  by  the  Board  for  want  of  the  necessary 
mesne  conveyance  to  connect  the  title  of  the  present  claimant  with 
that  of  the  original  grantee.  That  defect  has  been  supplied  in  this 
Court,  and  no  objection  to  the  confirmation  is  perceived  by  us  or  is 
suggested  on  the  part  of  the  United  States. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  99 

United  States  v.  Cernal. 

THE   UNITED   STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  JOSE  SANTOS 
BERREYESA,  claiming  the  Rancho  Mallacomes. 

The  confirmation  of  this  claim  not  disputed. 

Claim  for  four  square  leagues  of  land  in  Napa  county,  confirmed 
bj  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Thornton  &  Williams,  for  Appellee. 

The  genuineness  of  the  grant  is  fully  proved,  and  the  circum- 
stances mentioned  appear  in  the  expediente  which  is  found  in  the 
archives. 

The  boundaries  of  the  land  are  proved  to  be  well  defined,  being 
on  three  sides  high  mountains,  on  the  fourth  the  rancho  of  Dr. 
Bale,  from  which  the  claimant's  land  is  separated  by  an  arroyo  having 
a  mill  upon  it  erected  by  Dr.  Bale. 

The  claim  was  confirmed  by  the  Board.  No  objection  is  urged 
on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  and  we  think  their  decision  should 
be  afiirmed. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  CARMEN  SIB- 
RIAN  DE  BERNAL  et  al,  claiming  a  lot  in  the  Mission 
Dolores. 

No  objection  to  this  claim  made  by  District  Attorney. 

Claim  for  a  lot  two  hundred  varas  square  in  the  county  of  San 
Francisco,  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United 
States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Halleck,  Peachy  &  Billings,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  is  for  a  solar  in  the  Mission  of  Dolores. 


100  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Osio. 

It  appears  to  have  been  granted  by  Governor  Figueroa  on  the  rec- 
ommendation of  the  priest  of  the  Mission,  and  in  consideration  of 
services  rendered  to  the  Mission  by  the  claimant  as  mayor  domo. 

No  argument  was  had  in  the  case  at  the  hearing,  nor  did  the 
District  Attorney  suggest  any  objection  to  the  vahdity  of  the  grant. 
The  claim  was  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  we  think  their  decision, 
in  the  absence  of  any  showing  to  the  contrary  on  the  part  of  the 
Government,  ought  to  be  affirmed. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  ANTONIO  MARIA 
OSIO,  CLAIMING  Angel  Island. 

The  grant  in  this  case  was  made  under  the  express  authority  of  the  Mexican 
Government. 

Claim  for  Angel  Island,  situated  in  the  Bay  of  San  Francisco. 
S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 
Bates  &  Lawrence,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  is  founded  on  a  grant  made  by  Governor 
Alvarado  on  the  eleventh  day  of  June,  1839. 

The  expediente  is  produced  from  the  archives,  and  the  genuine- 
ness of  the  original  grant  fully  established. 

The  island  which  is  the  subject  of  the  grant  appears  to  have 
been  used  almost  immediately  after  the  grant  by  the  claimant  for 
the  raising  of  cattle,  horses,  etc.,  a  considerable  number  of  which 
he  placed  upon  it.  He  also  built  upon  it  a  small  house,  which  was 
occupied  by  his  mayor  domo. 

The  claimant,  although  he  did  not  personally  reside  on  the  island, 
frequently  visited  it :  and  on  one  occasion  remained  upon  it  three 
months,  superintending,  among  other  things,  the  erection  of  a  dam 
to  form  a  reservoir  for  the  use  of  his  cattle.  His  title  to  the  land 
seems  to  have  been  generally  known  and  recognized,  and  the  cattle 
upon  it  were  marked  with  his  brand.     He  afterwards  built  three 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  101 

United  States  v.  Cooper. 

other  houses  and  put  a  portion  of  the  land  under  cultivation,  and 
at  the  time  of  the  war  his  cattle  were  used  to  the  number  of  five 
hundred. 

The  only  doubt  which  can  be  suggested  with  regard  to  the  valid- 
ity of  the  claimant's  title  is,  whether  the  Governor  had  a  right  to 
grant  islands  upon  or  near  the  coast. 

But  it  appears  that  the  grants  of  this  and  other  islands  were 
made  by  the  express  direction  of  the  Superior  Government  of  Mex- 
ico ;  and  the  Governor  was  enjoined  to  grant  the  islands  to  Mexicans 
in  order  to  prevent  their  occupation  by  foreigners,  who  might  injure 
the  commerce  and  fisheries  of  the  Repubhc,  and  who,  especially 
the  Russians,  might  otherwise  acquire  a  permanent  foothold  upon 
them. 

We  agree  with  the  Board  in  the  opinion  that  this  express  author- 
ity to  make  these  grants  removes  all  doubt  on  the  subject. 

The  Board  have  unanimously  confirmed  this  claim,  and  we  see 
no  reason  for  reversing  their  decision. 

Their  decree  must  therefore  be  affirmed. 


THE   UNITED   STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  JOHN  B.   R. 

COOPER,    CLAIMING   THE   RaNCHO    El   MoLINO. 
No  objections  made  to  the  confirmation  of  this  claim. 

Claim  for  four  leagues  of  land  in  Sonoma  county,  confirmed  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Halleck,  Peachy  k  Billings,  for  Appellee. 

The  claimant  in  this  case,  a  naturalized  Mexican  citizen,  obtained 
in  December,  1833,  a  grant  from  the  Governor  for  the  place  called 
Rio  Ojotska.  This  grant  was  approved  by  the  Departmental  Assem- 
bly, and  a  certificate  of  its  confirmation  delivered  to  the  grantee,  as 
appears  from  the  testimony,  and  the  expediente  filed  in  this  case. 


102  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Cooper. 

He  subsequently  applied  to  the  Governor  for  an  exchange  of  the 
land  granted  for  that  now  claimed  by  him.  Proceedings  on  this 
application  were  commenced  by  Governor  Figueroa,  and  the  new 
grant  was  made,  as  desired  by  the  petitioner,  by  Governor  Gutier- 
rez on  the  twenty-fourth  of  February,  1836. 

These  facts  are  proved  by  the  testimony  of  Hartnell  and  Vallejo, 
whose  evidence  is  corroborated  by  the  expediente  on  file  in  the 
archives. 

The  genuineness  of  the  grants  is  fully  established. 

Previously  to  obtaining  the  last  grant,  the  claimant  had  gone  into 
possession  of  the  tract  sohcited,  and  had  built  a  house  upon  it.  He 
also  had,  as  early  as  1834,  placed  a  considerable  number  of  cattle 
upon  it,  and  had  commenced  the  erection  of  a  mill,  upon  which  he 
expended  more  than  110,000.  He  also  erected  a  blacksmith  shop, 
and  for  two  years  had  employed  upon  his  Rancho  men  to  the  aver- 
age number  of  sixteen,  and  sometimes  thirty  or  forty  Indians. 

It  is  clear  that  the  grantee  fulfilled  the  conditions  and  carried 
out  the  objects  of  the  colonization  laws  to  an  extent  very  unusual 
in  the  then  condition  of  the  country. 

With  regard  to  the  location  of  the  land,  it  appears  from  the  tes- 
timony of  O'Farrell  and  other  witnesses,  who  are  acquainted  with  the 
adjacent  country,  that  there  is  no  difficulty  in  ascertaining  its  local- 
ity by  means  of  the  diseno  which  accompnies  the  grant.  O'Far- 
rell, who  had  long  been  a  surveyor  under  the  Mexicans,  testifies 
that  he  has,  by  means  of  the  grant  and  the  diseno,  made  a  survey 
of  the  land,  and  that  it  contains,  as  surveyed  by  him,  only  the 
quantity  specified  in  the  grant. 

This  claim  was  held  to  be  valid  by  the  Board.  No  objections  to 
it  are  suggested  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  and  we  are  of 
opinion  that  the  decision  of  the  Board  should  be  affirmed. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  103 

United  States  v.  Moraga. 

THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  JOAQUIN  MORA. 

GA,  CLAIMING  THE  RaNCHO  LaGUNA  DE  PaLOS  CoLORADOS. 
The  validity  of  this  claim  undoubted. 

Claim  for  three  leagues  of  land  in  Contra  Costa  county,  con- 
firmed by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Bates  &  Lawrence,  for  Appellee.        i 

The  claimants  in  this  case  petitioned  on  the  thirtieth  of  August, 
1835,  for  the  place  called  "  Laguna  de  los  Palos  Colorados." 

The  petition  was  referred  to  the  Ayuntamiento  del  Pueblo  de  S. 
Jose  Guadalupe,  and  also  to  the  Rev.  Padre,  for  their  reports.  On 
receiving  these  reports,  which  were  favorable,  Jose  Castro,  Primero 
Vocal  of  the  Assembly  and  Political  Chief,  ad  interim^  made  his 
concession  on  the  tenth  of  October,  1835,  and  directed  that  when 
the  Departmental  Assembly  should  have  approved  the  grant  the 
corresponding  title  should  issue. 

On  the  twelfth  of  October,  1835,  the  concession  was  approved, 
but  the  "  title  "  does  not  seem;5o  have  issued  until  the  thirty-first  of 
July,  1841. 

All  the  foregoing  facts  appear  from  the  expediente  on  file  in  the 
archives  of  the  former  Government. 

The  claimants  have  also  produced  ^J, the  original  title  dehvered  to 
them,  which  bears  date  on  the  tenth  of  August,  1841,  to  which  is 
attached  a  map  or  diseno  certified  by  Jimeno,  Secretary  of  the 
Government,  to  be  a  copy  of  that  accompanying  the  expediente. 
The  translation  of  this  certificate  seems  to  be  omitted.  There  also 
accompanies  this  document  the  certificate  of  approval  by  the  De- 
partmental Assembly,  and  a  note  or  record  of  an  arrangement 
between  Moraga  and  Candelario  Valencia,  who  seems  to  have  been 
a  colindante  or  coterminous  owner,  fixing  their  common  line  and 
providing  for  the  use  in  common  of  an  ojo  de  agua  or  spring  of  water 
which  is  on  the  land. 

The  authenticity  of  all  these  documents  is  fully  proved,  and  it  is 


104  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Bennitz  v.  United  States. 

shown  that  in  1836  the  parties  went  upon  the  land,  built  houses, 
corrals,  and  placed  cattle  upon  it,  and  cultivated  a  considerable  por- 
tion. 

The  boundaries  of  the  tract  are  given  with  some  precision  in  the 
original  grant,  and  it  appears  in  evidence  that  the  limits  of  the 
rancho  are  well  known  to  those  residing  in  its  vicinity. 

The  claim  was  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  we  think  their  decis- 
ion should  be  affirmed. 


WILLIAM  BENNITZ,  claiming  the  Rancho  Breisgan,  Ap- 
pelant, vs,  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

The  validity  of  the  Sutter  general  title  was  affirmed  by  the  Circuit  Judge  in  case 
No.  33 — United  States  v.  Hensley. 

Claim  for  five  leagues  of  land  in  the  county  of  Shasta,  rejected 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimant. 

Jeremiah  Clarke,  for  Appellant. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  appellant  in  this  case  claims  under  the  general  grant  by 
Governor  Micheltorena  on  the  twenty-second  of  December,  1844, 
which  has  already  been  considered  and  passed  upon  by  this  Court 
in  the  case  of  S.  J.  Hensley. 

It  appears  in  evidence  that  the  present  claimant  was  one  of  those 
in  whose  favor  Capt.  Sutter  had  reported,  and  for  whose  benefit  the 
general  grant  was  made. 

It  further  appears  that  the  claimant  in  1845  placed  a  tenant 
upon  the  land,  by  whom  a  portion  of  it  was  cultivated,  and  who 
continued  to  reside  upon  it  until  the  summer  or  fall  of  1846,  when 
he  was  killed  by  the  Indians.  There  seems  no  reason  to  suppose 
that  the  claimant  ever  abandoned  his  grant,  and  under  the  ruling 
of  this  Court  in  the  case  of  Hensley,  we  think  the  claim  should  be 
affirmed. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  105 

United  States  v.  Castro, 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  JOAQUIN  Y.  CAS- 
TRO, Administrator  of  Francisco  Maria  Castro,  deceased, 

CLAIMING  THE  RaNCHO    SaN  PaBLO. 
No  opposition  to  the  confirmation  of  this  claim. 

Claim  for  about  four  leagues  of  land  in  Contra  Costa  county, 
confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Saunders  &  Hepburn,  for  Appellee. 

This  case  has  been  submitted  to  this  Court  on  appeal  without 
argument  or  the  statement  of  any  objection  to  its  validity.  We 
have,  however,  as  in  other  cases,  examined  the  transcript,  which  is 
unusually  voluminous,  and  have  perceived  no  obstacle  to  its  con- 
firmation. 

The  first  application  for  the  land  appears  to  have  been  made  by 
Don  Francisco  Castro  in  1823,  and  to  have  been  addressed  to  the 
Deputation.  On  the  same  day  a  decree  was  made  granting  the 
place  solicited,  and  directing  the  MiHtary  Commander  of  the  Pre- 
sidio of  San  Francisco  to  put  the  petitioner  in  possession.  This 
seems,  from  various  causes,  not  to  have  been  done,  nor  does  the 
title  to  the  land  appear  to  have  issued  to  Francisco  Castro  during 
his  lifetime,  although,  as  appears  from  the  expediente,  he  had  gone 
upon  the  land,  placed  cattle  upon  it,  and  from  time  to  time  solicited 
of  the  Governor  the  formal  title. 

On  his  death,  his  son  and  the  administrator  of  his  estate,  Joaquin 
Ysidro  Castro,  petitioned  the  Governor  on  the  twenty-sixth  of  May, 
1834,  for  the  land  occupied  by  the  family,  stating  it  to  be  three 
leagues  in  extent,  and  annexing  to  his  petition  a  map  of  the  land 
soUcited.  The  Governor,  after  having  caused  the  documents  on  file 
in  the  case  of  the  previous  application  of  Francisco  Castro  to  be 
produced,  acceded  to  the  petition,  and  on  the  twelfth  of  June, 
1834,  the  formal  title  issued  to  the  successors  of  Francisco  Castro. 
In  this  title  the  boundaries  of  the  land  are  mentioned,  and  sefer- 
8 


106  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Castro. 

ence  is  made  to  the  map  which  accompanies  the  expediente.  The 
extent  of  the  land  granted  is  stated  to  be  three  square  leagues, 
more  or  less. 

On  the  twenty-third  of  June,  1835,  Joaquin  Ysidro  Castro  pre- 
sented another  petition  to  the  Governor,  in  which  he  states  that  he 
had  through  inadvertence  neglected  to  ask  for  all  the  land  included 
in  the  boundaries  indicated  on  the  diseno,  and  he  solicits  an  aug- 
mentation of  the  previous  grant  so  as  to  include  the  whole  tract 
designated  on  the  map.  By  the  report  of  Negrete,  the  Secretary 
to  whom  the  Governor  referred  this  petition,  it  appears  that  the 
land  comprised  within  the  boundaries  referred  to  had  been  ascer- 
tained to  be  of  the  extent  of  four  and  one  twenty-fourth  square 
leagues. 

On  the  fourteenth  of  August,  1835,  the  Governor  granted  to 
the  successors  of  Francisco  Castro  the  augmentation  solicited,  and 
on  the  twentieth  of  August,  1835,  the  formal  title  was  issued  for 
the  land  as  originally  bounded,  and  in  the  fourth  so  called  condi- 
tion of  the  title,  the  extent  of  the  tract  is  declared  to  be  "  four 
square  leagues  and  a  little  over,  including  the  surplus  which  by  the 
decree  of  the  fourteenth  of  August  of  the  present  year  was  granted 
to  them,  and  as  shown  by  the  map  which  accompanies  the  expedi- 
ente and  already  conceded  to  them." 

It  is  this  tract  of  four  square  leagues  and  a  little  over  that  is  now 
claimed  by  the  appellees. 

All  the  above  recited  facts  appear  from  the  expedientes  on  file. 
The  authenticity  of  the  original  documents  produced  by  the  inter- 
ested parties  is  fully  proved,  and  their  long  continued  occupation 
and  extensive  improvements  of  the  land  for  more  than  thirty  years 
clearly  established.  It  also  appears  that  the  grant  was  approved 
by  the  Departmental  Assembly. 

We  are  of  opinion  therefore  that  this  claim  is  valid,  and  that  the 
decision  of  the  Board  should  be  affirmed. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  107 

Grimes  v.  United  States. 

HIRAM   GRIMES    et  aL,  cliaming  the    Rancho  El  Pesca- 
DERO,  Appellants,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

Objections  removed  by  additional  testimony,  and  by  the  ruling  of  the  Supreme 
Court  in  Fremont's  case. 

Claim  for  eight  leagues  of  land  in  San  Joaquin  county,  rejected 
bj  the  Board,  and  appealed  hj  the  claimants. 

A.  C.  Whitcomb,  for  Appellants. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  was  rejected  by  the  Board  of  Commis- 
sioners. Since  the  filing  of  the  transcript  in  this  Court,  additional 
testimony  has  been  taken,  and  the  case  has  been  submitted  on  tjae 
brief  filed  by  the  counsel  for  the  appellees.  No  argument  was  made 
or  brief  filed  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  and  the  District 
Attorney,  it  is  presumed,  relies  upon  the  objections  to  the  claim 
which  are  set  forth  in  the  opinion  of  the  Board. 

With  regard  to  the  delivery  of  the  original  grant  to  the  grantee, 
the  Commissioners,  although  their  decision  is  not  placed  upon  that 
ground,  seem  to  have  entertained  some  doubt,  from  the  fact  that  it 
is  not  produced  by  the  claimants.  But  we  think  that  this  objection, 
whatever  force  it  might  have  under  the  testimony  submitted  to  the 
Board,  is  entirely  obviated  by  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Evershed,  Capt. 
Halleck  and  Balentin  Higuera,  taken  in  this  Court.  The  circum- 
stance that  the  grant  is  found  among  the  archives  and  not  in  the 
possession  of  the  party  is  by  these  witnesses  satisfactorily  explained. 

With  regard  to  the  performance  of  the  conditions,  it  appears  that 
the  original  grantees  had,  before  obtaining  the  grant,  but  subse- 
quently to  the  date  of  their  apphcation  to  the  Governor  for  the 
land,  built  a  corral  upon  it  and  placed  there  about  two  hundred 
head  of  horses  and  some  work  oxen.  Higuera  also  built  a  sort  of 
rude  hut  in  which  he  lived,  and  the  witness  Romero  testifies  that 
he  was  on  the  Rancho  about  fifteen  or  sixteen  days  assisting  Hi- 
guera. The  further  improvement  of  the  land  seems  in  some  degree 
to  have  been  prevented  by  the  Indians,  and  in  1849  the  grantees 


108  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Grimes  v.  United  States. 

sold  out  to  McKee,  under  whom  the  appellants  claim,  and  who 
appears  to  have  laid  out  a  city  on  the  Rancho.  There  were  in 
1850  six  frame  buildings  on  the  site  of  the  intended  city,  and 
McKee  seems  to  have  expended  considerable  sums  of  money  on 
his  purchase. 

It  is  also  stated  in  the  deposition  of  Hernandez,  whose  Rancho 
adjoined  that  of  Higuera  and  Feliz,  (the  grantees  in  this  case) 
that  the  latter  occupied  the  land  along  the  San  Joaquin  river  up  to 
the  Arroyo  de  la  Puerta,  and  had  upon  it  a  corral  and  a  house  on 
the  banks  of  the  San  Joaquin,  about  opposite  the  Stanislaus  river. 
The  witness,  however,  assigns  no  date  at  which  the  corral  and 
house  were  erected. 

Higuera,  one  of  the  original  grantees,  who  swears  that  he  no 
longer  has  any  interest  in  the  case,  testifies  that  soon  after  obtain- 
in2:  the  grant  he  built  a  corral  and  house  on  the  land,  and  had 
cattle  and  horses  thereon,  but  took  them  away  in  1849  through  fear 
of  the  Indians. 

Under  all  the  testimony  of  the  case,  we  think  there  is  nothing  to 
show  that  the  performance  of  the  conditions  has  been  unreasonably 
delayed,  or  that  the  grantees  had  abandoned  their  grant.  The 
objection,  therefore,  of  nonperformance  of  conditions  must,  under 
the  principles  laid  down  in  Tlie  United  States  vs.  Fremont^  be 
overruled. 

With  regard  to  the  location  of  the  grant,  there  seems  to  be  no 
difficulty.  In  the  title  the  land  is  described  as  the  tract  known  by 
the  name  of  "  Pescadero,"  and  bounded  by  the  river,  by  Buenos 
Ayres  to  the  Pass  of  Pescadero,  and  the  limits  which  shall  be  set 
at  the  time  of  the  possession,  on  the  side  of  the  valley.  In  the 
fourth  condition,  the  land  is  declared  to  consist  of  eight  leagues, 
or  a  little  less,  as  the  corresponding  map  explains.  On  reference 
to  the  map  the  boundaries  of  the  tract  appear  to  be  delineated  with 
tolerable  accuracy,  and  the  testimony  in  the  case  leaves  no  room 
for  doubt  that  its  limits  are  well  known  and  capable  of  being  pre- 
cisely ascertained.  The  grant,  it  will  be  perceived,  mentions  two 
boundaries — the  river  (San  Joaquin)  and  Buenos  Ayres  to  the  Pass 
of  the  Pescadero.  The  Arroyo  de  la  Puerta  seems  also  indicated 
as  the  southerly  boundary  of  the  map,  but  all  doubt  on  this  subject 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  109 

United  States  v.  Boggs. 

is  removed  by  the  evidence,  not  only  of  the  coHndantes  and  others 
who  testify  as  to  the  extent  and  boundaries  of  what  was  known  as 
the  Pescadero  Rancho,  but  by  the  production  of  the  expediente  for 
the  Hernandez  Rancho,  which  lies  immediatefy  to  the  south  of  the 
tract  now  claimed.  In  the  diseno  which  accompanies  that  expe- 
diente, the  Arroyo  de  la  Puerta  is  distinctly  marked  as  the  lindero 
or  boundary  of  the  two  Ranches,  the  Arroyo  forming  in  fact  the 
northern  boundary  of  the  Hernandez  and  the  southern  boundary 
of  the  Pescadero  Ranches.  The  boundaries  seem  thus  to  have 
been  fixed  or  recognized  by  the  highest  authority,  the  Governor 
himself,  almost  contemporaneously  with  the  grant,  for  the  Hernandez 
concession  was  made  but  a  few  days  after  the  grant  under  consid- 
eration. 

The  above  are  all  the  objections  to  the  validity  of  the  grant  which 
are  noticed  in  the  opinion  of  the  Commissioners,  and  none  other 
have  been  suggested  to  this  Court. 

The  expediente  in  this  case  is  defective,  for  the  decree  of  con- 
cession is  not  contained  in  it.  Whatever  suspicions  this  fact  might 
give  rise  to,  are  dispelled  by  the  proofs  which  have  been  submitted 
of  the  execution  and  delivery  of  the  formal  title  to  the  grantees, 
and  the  almost  contemporaneous  grant  to  Mariano  and  Pedro  Her- 
nandez, in  which  the  Governor  mentions  the  land  of  "  Don  Balen- 
tin  Higuera"  as  one  of  the  boundaries  of  the  tract  granted  to 
them. 

The  mesne  conveyances  seem  to  be  regular,  and  a  decree  of  con- 
firmation must  therefore  be  entered. 


THE   UNITED   STATES,  Appellants,  vs.   L.  W.  BOGGS, 

CLAIMING   PART   OP   THE    RaNCHO    NaPA. 

No  objections  urged  to  the  confirmation  of  this  claim. 

Claim  for  six  hundred  aud  forty  acres  in  Napa  county,  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 


110  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Sunol. 

Halleck,  Peachy  &  Billings,  for  Appellee. 

The  claim  in  this  case  is  for  a  portion  of  the  tract  called  Napa, 
originally  granted  to  Salvador  Yallejo  by  Governor  Alvarado  on 
the  twenty-first  of  September,  1838. 

The  claim  was  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  the  case  has  been 
submitted  to  this  Court  without  argument  or  the  statement  of  any 
objection  on  the  part  of  the  United  States. 

The  documentary  and  other  evidence  shows  that  the  original 
grant  was  duly  issued  by  the  Governor,  and  approved  by  the  De- 
partmental Assembly  on  the  twenty-third  of  September,  1838. 
Judicial  possession  of  the  tract  was  given  to  the  grantee  in  1844, 
but  before  that  time,  and  at  or  about  the  period  he  obtained  his 
grant,  he  occupied  the  land,  built  a  house  upon  it  and  corrals,  and 
had  cattle  and  horses  upon  it.  Shortly  after  the  war,  the  appellee 
purchased  of  the  original  grantee  the  portion  now  claimed.  He 
immediately  commenced  making  improvements,  and  has  continued 
to  occupy  until  the  present  time. 

There  seems  to  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  vahdity  of  this  claim.  A 
decree  of  confirmation  must  therefore  be  entered. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  v^.  ANTONIO  SUNOL 

et  al,^  CLAIMING  THE  Rancho  Los  Coches. 

This  claim  submitted  without  argument  on  behalf  of  appellants. 

Claim  for  a  half-league  of  land  in  Santa  Clara  county,  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Halleck,  Peachy  &  Billings,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  was  unanimously  confirmed  by  the  late 
Board  of  Commissioners.  It  has  been  submitted  to  this  Court  on 
the  proofs  taken  before  the  Board,  and  without  argument  on  the 
part  of  the  appellants,  or  the  statement  of  any  objection  to  its 
validity. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  Ill 

United   States  v.  Briones. 

On  reference  to  the  opinion  of  the  Board,  we  find  but  two  ques- 
tions discussed,  and  which,  it  is  presumed,  were  the  only  points 
made  on  the  part  of  the  United  States. 

The  first  relates  to  the  location  of  the  grant.  The  Board,  after 
an  elaborate  and  thorough  examination  of  the  testimony,  arrive  at 
the  conclusion  that  the  calls  in  the  grant  and  the  delineation  of  the 
tract  on  the  diseno  are  abundantly  sufficient  to  enable  a  Surveyor 
to  locate  the  grant.  On  examining  the  transcript,  this  opinion  of 
the  Board  seems  fully  sustained  by  the  proofs,  and  the  doubts  or 
difficulties  felt  by  some  of  the  witnesses  as  to  the  proper  location 
of  the  land  seems  to  have  originated  in  a  misconception  of  the  true 
meaning  of  some  of  the  calls  in  the  grant.  The  grantee  is  shown 
to  have  occupied  his  land  from  a  period  anterior  to  his  grant ;  to 
have  lived  there  with  his  wife  and  children,  and  to  have  made  con- 
siderable improvements. 

To  the  discussion  of  the  second  and  more  important  question, 
whether  Roberts,  the  original  grantee,  being  an  Indian,  had  a  right 
to  receive  grants  of  land  under  the  Mexican  laws,  and  to  convey  the 
land  so  granted,  the  Board  devote  a  large  portion  of  their  opinion. 
But  that  question  has  been  settled  in  the  Supreme  Court  in  accord- 
ance with  the  views  expressed  by  the  Board,  and  is  no  longer  open 
for  argument  in  this  Court. 

The  genuineness  of  the  original  documents  is  not  questioned,  and 
the  title  of  the  present  claimant  appears  to  have  been  regularly 
derived  from  the  original  grantee  and  his  heirs,  and  to  have  been 
accompanied  by  possession. 

A  decree  affirming  the  decision  of  the  Board  miist  therefore  be 
entered. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  JUANA  BRIONES, 

CLAIMING   THE    RaNCHO    La   PuRISIMA    CoNCEPCION. 

The  validity  of  this  claim  undoubted. 

Claim  for  one  square  league  of  land  in  Santa  Clara  county,  con- 
firmed by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 


112  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Bassett. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 
Halleck,  Peachy  &  Billings,  for  Appellee. 

The  Board  of  Commissioners,  in  their  opinion  in  this  case,  observe 
that  it  presents  no  point  of  doubt  or  difficulty.  The  genuineness 
of  the  original  grant  is  fully  established.  The  grantees  are  shown 
to  have  been  in  the  possession  and  occupation  of  the  land  for  sev- 
eral years  prior  to  their  grant,  and  continued  to  reside  on  it  until 
1844,  when,  with  the  permission  of  the  Governor,  it  was  sold  to 
the  present  claimant.  The  latter  has  resided  on  it  up  to  the  time 
of  the  fihng  of  her  petition. 

In  a  note  appended  to  the  original  grant,  the  boundaries  are  indi- 
cated with  much  precision  ;  and  the  grant  declares  the  quantity  of 
land  granted  to  be  one  square  league. 

No  objection  was  made  to  this  claim  on  behalf  of  the  United 
States,  and  we  think  it  should  be  confirmed  to  the  appellee. 

A  decree  to  that  effect  will  therefore  be  entered. 


THE   UNITED   STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  NATHANIEL 
BASSETT,  CLAIMING  THE  Rancho  Los  Coluses. 

The  validity  of  claims  under  the  Sutter  General  Title,  affirmed  in  Heusley's  case, 
No.  33. 

Claim  for  four  leagues  of  land  in  Butte  county,  confirmed  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

E.  0.  Crosby,  for  Appellees. 

The  original  grantee  in  this  case  was  one  of  those  who  petitioned 
Governor  Micheltorena  in  1844,  and  whose  lands  were  granted  in 
the  general  grant  dated  December  22d,  1844.  The  validity  of 
this  grant  has  been  already  passed  upon  by  this  Court  in  the  case 
of  The  United  States  vs.  Samiiel  J.  Hensley^  and  as  the  grantee 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  113 


Pacheco  v.  United  States, 


in  this  case  is  proved  to  have  been  one  of  those  whose  petition  was 
favorably  reported  on  by  General  Sutter,  and  to  whom  the  latter 
caused  to  be  delivered  a  copy  of  the  general  grant,  the  claim  clearly 
falls  within  the  principles  decided  in  that  case. 

The  grantee  is  also  shown  to  have  occupied  and  cultivated  his 
land  in  1844  under  the  provisional  order  or  permission  granted  by 
the  Governor. 

No  objection  is  made  to  the  confirmation  of  this  claim  on  the 
part  of  the  United  States.  It  was  unanimously  confirmed  by  the 
Board,  and  we  see  no  reason  for  reversing  their  decision. 

A  decree  of  confirmation  must  therefore  be  entered. 


JUAN  PEREZ  PACHECO,  Appellant,  claiming  the  Rancho 
San  Luis  Gonzaga,  vs,  THE  UNITED   STATES. 

This  claim  entitled  to  confirmation  under  the  ruling  of  the  Supreme  Court  in 
Fremont's  case. 

Claim  for  eleven  leagues  of  land  in  Mariposa  county,  rejected  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimant. 

Stanly  &  King,  for  Appellant. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  is  founded  on  a  grant  made  by  Governor 
Micheltorena  on  the  fourth  of  November,  1843.  It  appears  from 
the  expediente,  a  copy  of  which  is  contained  in  the  transcript,  that 
one  Mejia  petitioned  the  Governor  on  the  twenty-sixth  of  Septem- 
ber, 1843,  for  a  grant  of  a  tract  of  land  lying  at  the  base  of  the 
hillocks  which  penetrate  into  the  valley  of  San  Joaquin,  with  the 
same  number  of  sitios  as  belonged  to  Francisco  Rivero,  to  whom  the 
Government  of  the  Department  had  granted,  but  who  had  neglected 
to  occupy  it  during  two  years  from  the  date  of  his  grant. 

The  Governor  made  the  usual  reference  of  this  petition  to  the 
Prefect  and  the  Secretary  for  information.  The  latter  officer  re- 
ported that  the  land  had  been  granted  to  Francisco  Rivero  since 


114  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Pacheco  v.  United  States. 

1841,  but  that  inasmuch  as  the  latter  had  failed  to  comply  with  the 
condition  requiring  him  to  build  a  house  within  one  year,  which 
should  be  inhabited,  he  (the  Secretary)  was  of  opinion  that  he  had 
forfeited  his  right  to  the  land,  and  that  it  might  be  granted  to 
Mejia,  the  petitioner. 

On  tlie  third  of  October,  1843,  the  Governor  ordered  the  title 
to  issue  in  conformity  with  this  report. 

In  the  decree  of  concession,  which  was  made  on  the  fourth  of  the 
ensuing  month,  the  Governor  recites  that,  in  consideration  of  the 
long  period  which  has  elapsed  "  without  the  land  being  occupied  by 
Don  Francisco  Rivero,  and  without  any  news  of  the  whereabouts  of 
said  individual,  and  inasmuch  as  the  interested  parties  have  the 
means  of  improving  and  occupying  the  land,"  he  declares  Jose  M. 
Mejia  and  Juan  Perez  Pacheco  owners  of  the  tract  known  as  San 
Luis  Gonzaga,  bounded  by  the  Rancho  of  Don  Francisco  Pacheco, 
by  the  Bath  called  Padre  Arroyo's  Bath,  by  the  river  and  the  wild 
Indian  country. 

In  the  third  condition,  the  land  is  declared  to  be  of  the  extent 
of  eleven  square  leagues. 

The  original  document  deUvered  to  the  parties  is  produced,  and 
the  genuinness  of  the  signatures  of  the  Governor  and  Secretary 
duly  proved.  It  is  in  entire  conformity  with  the  decree  of  conces- 
sion found  in  the  expediente. 

By  the  testimony  of  Jose  Abrego,  it  appears  that  for  eight  years 
previous  to  1853  the  Rancho  was  in  the  possession  and  occupation 
of  the  petitioner ;  that  he  constructed  and  occupied  several  small 
houses  by  himself  and  those  in  his  employment ;  that  he  also  built 
several  large  corrals,  and  cultivated  portions  of  the  land  during  all 
that  period. 

By  the  depositions  of  Rodriguez  and  Dias,  taken  in  this  Court, 
it  is  shown  that  the  land  was  occupied  as  soon  as  the  hostihty  of  the 
Indians  permitted  ;  that  the  Rancho  was  peculiarly  exposed  to  their 
depredations,  being  on  the  route  most  frequented  by  them  in  coming 
from  the  Tulares.  The  witness  Dias  states  that  he  is  unable  to 
specify  the  precise  time  when  the  first  settlement  was  effected,  but 
knows  that  the  land  was  occupied  in  1847. 

It  is  obvious  that  there  is  no  proof  that  the  condition  requiring 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  115 

Pacheco  v.  United  States. 

a  house  to  be  built  within  the  year  was  ever  complied  with  by  the 
grantees,  and  for  the  want  of  such  the  Board  was  of  opinion  that 
the  claim  should  be  rejected,  more  particularly  as  the  claimants 
had  obtained  their  grant  on  a  denouncement  founded  on  the  neglect 
of  the  previous  grantee  to  perform  the  very  same  condition  which 
they  failed  themselves  to  fulfill. 

The  proofs  taken  in  this  Court  show,  however,  an  excuse  for  non- 
settlement  which  was  not  offered  to  the  Board,  and  it  is  very  doubt- 
ful whether  in  this  case,  even  had  the  land  been  denounced  to  the 
Mexican  Government,  it  would  have  been  regranted.  It  is  worthy 
of  observation,  that  in  the  decree  of  concession  the  Governor  states, 
not  only  that  Rivero,  the  previous  grantee,  had  failed  to  occupy  the 
land  within  the  year,  but  that  the  period  of  two  years  elapsed 
"  without  any  news  of  the  whereabouts  of  that  individual."  It 
may  therefore  be  reasonably  inferred  that  the  land  was  forfeited, 
not  merely  in  obedience  to  a  rigorous  rule  which  imposed  that  con- 
sequence as  penalty  for  the  nonperformance  of  the  conditions,  but 
because  the  Governor  was  satisfied  the  grantee  had  abandoned  his 
grant,  and  had,  at  all  events,  failed  to  show  either  an  effort  to  ful- 
fill or  an  excuse  for  not  doing  so. 

But  whatever  action  the  Governor  might  have  taken  had  this 
land  been  denounced  as  against  the  present  claimants,  no  such 
proceeding  was  had,  and  the  proof  shows  that  a  settlement  was 
efiected  within  less  than  two  years  from  the  date  of  the  grant,  and 
during  the  continuance  of  the  former  Government. 

The  principles  laid  down  in  the  case  of  The  United  States  vs. 
Fremont  apply  therefore  with  great  force  to  this  case.  For  here 
there  was  not  only  no  second  denouncement,  but  the  conditions 
were  fully  complied  with  during  the  existence  of  the  Mexican  au- 
thority ;  and  the  proofs  show  not  only  that  there  was  no  unreason- 
able delay  or  want  of  effort,  but  they  absolutely  repel  the  idea  that 
the  party  had  abandoned  his  claim  before  the  Mexican  power  ceased 
to  exist,  and  is  now  seeking  to  resume  it  from  its  enhanced  value. 
It  may  also  be  observed  that  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that 
under  the  Mexican  laws  land  could  in  any  case  be  denounced  after 
the  conditions  had  been  fulfilled,  whether  within  or  after  the  time 
limited  in  the  grant. 


116  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Pico  V.  United  States. 

The  remaining  objection  to  this  claim  which  is  noticed  in  the 
opinion  of  the  Board  is,  that  the  grant  is  vague  and  general,  and 
has  never  been  located  by  competent  authority. 

But  by  the  testimony  taken  in  this  Court,  it  appears  that  the 
natural  objects  mentioned  in  the  grant  are  notoriously  known,  and 
the  description  is  as  accurate  as  could  be  given  without  a  survey. 
On  referring  to  the  grant  the  boundaries  seem  to  be  indicated  with 
some  precision.  The  Rancho  of  Francisco  Pacheco,  the  Bath  of 
Padre  Arroyo,  and  the  river  (San  Joaquin)  are  all  mentioned,  and 
there  seems  no  reason  to  doubt  the  statement  of  the  witnesses  that 
by  means  of  these  calls  the  land  can,  without  difficulty,  be  located. 
No  other  objections  to  this  grant  are  stated  in  the  opinion  of  the 
Board,  nor  are  any  others  raised  on  the  part  of  the  United  States, 
the  case  having  been  submitted  without  argument  or  suggestion 
on  the  part  of  the  appellees. 

A  decree  of  confirmation  must  therefore  be  entered. 


ANDRES  PICO,  CLAIMING  the  Rancho  Arroyo  Seco,  Appel- 
lant, vs,  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

This  claim  must  be  confirmed  under  the  ruling  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Fre- 
mont's case. 

Claim  for  eleven  leagues  of  land  in  Amador  county,  rejected  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimant. 

Stanly  &  King,  for  Appellant. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  is  founded  on  a  grant  by  Governor  Alva- 
rado  to  Teodocio  Yorba  on  the  eighth  of  May,  1840. 

The  title  of  the  present  claimant  is  derived  from  the  original 
grantee  by  deed  dated  October  4th,  1852. 

The  genuineness  of  the  original  is  established  by  proof,  but  the 
only  evidence  that  the  grantee  ever  performed  the  conditions  of  the 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  117 

Pico  V.  United  States. 

grant  is  contained  in  the  depositions  of  Luis  Arenas,  Vicente  P. 
Gomez  and  Antonio  Castro  taken  in  this  Court.  By  the  testimony 
of  the  first  of  these  witnesses  it  appears  that  the  rancho  in  March 
or  April,  1849,  was  occupied  by  both  Pico  and  Yorba,  and  that 
they  had  cattle  and  a  small  house  on  the  place. 

Vicente  Gomez  swears  that  he  has  known  the  rancho  since  1848, 
and  that  at  that  time  it  was  occupied  by  Pico  and  Yorba ;  that  they 
had  a  log  house  upon  it  and  cattle  and  horses.  The  witness  Castro 
testifies  substantially  to  the  same  facts. 

Neither  of  these  witnesses  states  positively  the  reason  why  the 
land  was  not  sooner  occupied,  but  they  all  testify  that  at  the  time 
they  mention,  and  as  late  as  1848,  the  Indians  were  very  hostile. 
It  also  appears  by  the  testimony  of  S.  Vallejo  that  from  1840  to 
1846  it  was  impossible  to  occupy  the  rancho  without  the  continual 
presence  of  the  soldiers  ;  that  the  Indians  held  almost  absolute  pos- 
session of  that  part  of  the  country,  unless  when  repelled  by  a 
strong  military  force.  Under  the  former  views  of  this  Court,  this 
claim  would  have  been  rejected ;  but  the  decision  of  the  Supreme 
Court  in  the  case  of  the  United  States  v.  Fremont  has  laid  down 
other  rules  for  our  guidance. 

The  grant  must,  under  the  principles  estabhshed  in  that  case,  be 
regarded  as  having  given  the  grantee  "  a  vested  interest  in  the 
quantity  of  land  therein  specified."  The  only  inquiry  "  is  whether 
the  right  of  the  grantee  was  forfeited  by  breach  of  the  conditions, 
and  the  title  revested  in  the  Mexican  Government."  (^United 
States  V.  Fremont^  17  How.  560.) 

If  the  interest  which  is  adjudged  to  have  vested  in  the  grantee 
by  the  unconfirmed  grant  of  the  Governor  be  the  legal  estate  in 
the  land,  then  the  only  right  which  could  have  passed  to  this  Gov- 
ernment would  be  the  right  to  declare  and  enforce  a  forfeiture 
which  had  accrued  under  the  former  Government. 

If,  then,  by  the  judgment  of  the  Court,  the  legal  title  remaining 
in  the  grantee  at  the  time  of  the  acquisition  of  the  country  and 
undivested  by  any  proceeding  under  the  Mexican  authority  be  de- 
clared to  be  forfeited,  it  would  seem  that  the  Court  is  in  effect 
asserting  the  "  right  of  the  United  States  by  forfeiture  for  condi- 
tions broken  to  lands  which  had  been  once  legally  granted."     The 


118  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Pico  V.  United  States. 

authority  of  the  Court  to  make  such  an  inquiry  or  assert  such  a 
right  seems  to  have  been  doubted  in  Sibhald's  case  (10  Pet.  321) 
and  in  other  cases,  nor  is  this  Court  aware  of  any  case  in  which 
that  right  has  been  recognized,  unless  the  case  of  Fremont  be  so 
regarded.  It  may,  however,  be  considered  that  on  the  breach  of 
the  conditions,  the  title  which  had  vested  in  the  grantee  reverted 
ipso  facto  to  the  Government,  without  any  judicial  proceeding  or 
other  act  on  the  part  of  the  Government  manifesting  its  intention 
to  take  advantage  of  the  forfeiture.  In  that  case  the  legal  estate 
in  the  land  passed  to  our  Government  by  the  treaty,  and  not  the 
mere  right  to  enforce  a  forfeiture.  Whether  such  a  consequence 
could  have  ensued  from  the  mere  breach  of  a  condition  subsequent, 
without  an  entry  of  the  grantor  or  an  office  found,  is  not  decided 
by  the  Supreme  Court ;  but  it  would  seem  more  in  accordance  with 
the  principles  which  pervade  every  system  of  jurisprudence  to  treat 
the  breach  of  such  conditions  as  rendering  the  grant  voidable  rather 
than  void,  and  especially  where  the  grantor  is  a  Government  which 
has  no  motive  vigorously  to  enforce  such  "  clauses  of  nuUity  "  or 
"  penal  clauses,"  and  whose  poHcy  it  is  to  regulate  their  effect  by 
the  discretion  of  the  Judge  or  other  officer  who  enforces  them,  ac- 
cording to  the  circumstances  of  each  case. 

Under  the  Mexican  system  it  appears  that  though  a  formal  judi- 
cial inquisition  was  not  invariably  instituted  to  ascertain  the  forfeit- 
ure, yet  where  land  was  denounced  the  inquiry  was  made  whether 
the  forfeiture  had  occurred  or  not,  and  the  excuses  of  the  first 
grantee  for  nonperformance  were  heard,  and  if  reasonable  received. 

If  then  it  be  considered  that  the  legal  title  vested  in  the  grantee 
by  virtue  of  his  grant,  and  that  it  did  not  revest  in  the  Government 
by  the  breach  of  the  conditions  unless  some  proceeding  were  had 
to  ascertain  and  declare  the  forfeiture,  it  would  seem  to  follow  that 
the  title  must  remain  in  the  grantee,  unless  the  Court  has  power  to 
declare  and  enforce  the  right  to  a  forfeiture  which  passed  to  the 
United  States  from  the  former  Government.  That  the  Supreme 
Court  did  proceed  to  inquire  whether  or  not  there  had  been  a  for- 
feiture, is  evident.  On  the  supposition,  therefore,  that  the  legal 
title  vested  in  the  grantee  by  the  original  grant,  the  case  of  Fremont 
would  seem  to  be  an  authority  for  the  position,  that  in  the  Califor- 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  119 

Pico  V.  United  States. 

nia  grants  the  Court  has  a  right  to  inqiure  into  and  enforce  a  forfeit- 
ure which  accrued  under  the  Mexican  Government  of  lands  legally 
granted. 

But  the  interest  which  vested  in  the  grantee  may  have  been 
deemed  bj  the  Supreme  Court  merely  an  equitable  interest,  not 
constituting  the  legal  title  but  entitling  the  grantee  to  a  legal  title 
from  this  Government,  or  giving  him  a  right  of  property  in  the 
land,  which  we  are  bound  to  respect. 

This  equity  the  Supreme  Court  apparently  regard  as  perfect, 
unless  the  omissions  of  the  grantee  to  perform  had  been  such  as  by 
the  Mexican  laws  and  usages  would  have  induced  the  Government 
to  have  regranted  the  land  as  vacant  or  forfeited.  Under  this  view 
the  inquiry  to  be  made  in  these  cases  would  seem  to  be  identical 
with  that  made  on  a  denouncement  under  the  Mexican  system. 
The  same  and  no  other  grounds  of  forfeiture  should  be  investigated 
and  the  same  excuses  received.  The  benignant  generosity  of  such 
a  principle,  so  worthy  of  a  great  nation  dealing  with  the  rights  of 
a  conquered  people,  all  must  appreciate. 

If  it  was  not  adopted  by  this  Court,  it  was  because  it  was  con- 
sidered that  the  only  equity  which  could  be  judicially  regarded  in 
these  cases  arose,  not  from  the  grant  of  the  Governor  alone,  but 
from  the  grant  and  the  subsequent  performance  of  the  conditions 
as  required  in  the  grant  or  gypres,  and  that  in  the  case  of  imper- 
fect or  incomplete  titles,  such  as  unconfirmed  grants  were  deemed 
to  be,  it  was  considered  that  under  the  altered  condition  of  the 
country,  the  enormously  increased  value  of  lands,  and  the  radical 
change  in  the  pohcy  of  the  Government  with  regard  to  its  pubhc 
domain,  the  grantee  who  had  neither  obtained  a  complete  title  or 
performed  the  conditions  had  no  right  to  demand  that  the  indul- 
gence should  be  shown  by  us  which  the  former  Government,  during 
its  existence,  had  no  motive  to  refuse,  but  which  if  it  had  continued 
it  would  not  probably,  under  the  present  circumstances,  have  ex- 
tended to  this  class  of  claimants. 

Perfect  or  confirmed  grants  were  supposed  to  stand  on  a  differ- 
ent footing ;  with  regard  to  them  it  was  considered  by  this  Court 
that  a  forfeiture  could  only  be  declared,  if  at  all,  under  the  same 
circumstances  as  by  Mexican  laws  and  usages  would  have  author- 


120  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Pico  V.  United  States. 

ized  a  regrant  of  the  land  on  a  denouncement.  But  whatever  view 
may  be  taken  of  these  questions,  the  duty  of  this  Court  is  clear. 
Following  then,  as  I  am  bound  to  do,  the  course  of  inquiry  upon 
the  result  of  which  the  determination  of  these  cases  has  been  ad- 
judged on  this  point  to  depend,  the  only  question  is  ''  whether 
there  has  been  any  unreasonable  delay  or  want  of  effort  on  the  part 
of  the  grantee  to  fulfill  the  conditions,  so  as  to  justify  the  presump- 
tion that  the  grantee  had  abandoned  his  claim  before  the  Mexican 
power  ceased  to  exist,  and  is  now  endeavoring  to  resume  it  from  its 
enhanced  value." 

This  question  is  widely  different  from  that  upon  the  determina- 
tion of  which  the  validity  of  grants  unconfirmed  by  the  Depart- 
mental Assembly  had  been  by  this  Court  supposed  to  depend. 

It  had  been  considered  by  this  Court  that  until  the  grant  received 
the  approbation  of  the  Assembly,  the  concession  by  the  Governor 
passed  only  an  imperfect  or  inchoate  title.  That  the  grantee  who 
had  under  the  former  Government  fulfilled  the  conditions,  and  by 
occupying  and  cultivating  the  land  rendered  the  only  consideration 
contemplated  by  its  policy  and  laws,  had  an  equitable  right  to  have 
his  title  perfected,  and  that  that  equity  was  binding  upon  the  con- 
science of  this  as  well  as  the  former  Government.  But  it  was  the 
opinion  of  this  Court  that  where  the  grantee  had  omitted  to  fulfill 
these  conditions,  or  was  prevented  by  obstacles  which  existed  and 
were  known  to  him  when  he  undertook  the  implied  and  sometimes 
express  obhgation  to  occupy  and  cultivate  the  land,  he  had  no  claim 
upon  this  Government  to  recognize  the  imperfect  title  he  had  ob- 
tained from  the  Governor. 

It  was  not  of  course  supposed  by  this  Court  that  these  conces- 
sions by  the  Governor  were  identical  with  the  permissions  to  occupy 
or  to  have  a  survey  made,  which  were  given  in  Louisiana  and 
Florida.  But  it  was  considered  that  the  regulations  of  1828  ex- 
pressly required  the  approval  of  the  Assembly  to  give  definitive 
validity  to  the  grant,  and  that  until  that  was  obtained  the  title  of 
the  person  to  whom  the  Governor  had  determined  to  concede  re- 
mained imperfect  or  inchoate,  and  that  his  equitable  claim  upon 
this  Government  to  respect  or  complete  it  must  be  founded  on  the 
fact  of  his  having  fulfilled  the  conditions  or  rendered  the  equiva- 
lent required  by  the  Mexican  law. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  123 

Pico  V.  United  States. 

Under  this  view  it  wus  thought  that  the  Louisiana  and  Florida 
cases  bore  a  close  analogy  to  those  in  this  State,  and  that  the  decis- 
ions of  the  Supreme  Court  with  regard  to  the  former  furnished  a 
guide  and  imposed  a  rule  as  to  the  latter. 

Some  confirmation  of  these  views  might  seem  to  be  afforded  by 
the  record  in  this  case,  for  the  witness  called  by  the  claimants  to 
prove  the  usages  of  the  former  Government  states  that  when  his 
lands  were  denounced  for  the  nonperformance  of  the  conditions,  he 
assigned  as  an  excuse  that  possession  had  not  been  taken  because 
the  grant  required  the  approval  of  the  Assembly,  that  this  excuse 
was  received  by  the  Government,  and  that  six  months  longer  was 
allowed  for  the  fulfillment  of  the  conditions. 

But  these  views,  formerly  taken  by  this  Court,  have  been  by  the 
judgment  of  our  highest  tribunal  decided  to  be  erroneous,  and  it 
now  becomes  our  duty  to  ascertain  and  obey  the  rules  of  decision 
which  that  venerated  authority  has  laid  down. 

In  the  case  of  Fremont  it  is  decided  that  by  the  grant  of  the 
Governor  the  grantee  acquired  a  vested  interest  in  the  land,  and 
that  the  question  is  "  whether  anything  done  or  omitted  to  be  done 
by  the  grantee,  during  the  existence  of  the  Mexican  Government 
in  California,  forfeited  the  interest  he  had  acquired  and  revested  it 
in  the  Government." 

No  denouncement  or  regrant  of  the  land  having  been  made  under 
the  former  Government,  the  Court  declares  "  that  there  is  nothing 
in  the  language  of  the  conditions,  taking  them  altogether,  nor  in 
their  evident  object  and  policy,  which  would  justify  the  Court  in 
declaring  the  land  forfeited  to  the  Government  where  no  other  per- 
son sought  to  appropriate  it,  and  their  performance  had  not  been 
unreasonably  delayed." 

In  the  case  at  bar  there  seems  to  have  been  neither  any  formal 
inquest  to  ascertain  and  declare  the  forfeiture,  nor  any  regrant  of  the 
land  to  a  subsequent  applicant,  and  the  reasons  which  it  is  said  by 
the  Supreme  Court,  in  the  case  so  often  cited,  would  justify  them  in 
declaring  the  land  to  be  forfeited,  do  not  seem  to  exist.  The  delay 
seems  to  have  arisen  from  the  same  causes,  and  to  be  excusable  on 
the  same  grounds  as  those  urged  in  Fremont's  case ;  nor  do  I  dis- 


124  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Leese. 

cover  any  evidence  justifying  the  presumption  of  a  final  abandon- 
ment of  his  grant  by  the  grantee. 

We,  therefore,  think  that  this  claim  ought  not  to  be  rejected  for 
the  nonperformance  of  the  conditions. 

This  title  was  also  held  to  be  invalid  by  the  Board  by  reason  of 
the  insufficiency  of  the  description  of  the  granted  land.  On  this 
subject  it  is  enough  to  say  that  this  objection  is  already  disposed  of 
by  the  case  of  Fremont. 

The  grant  in  that  case  "  was  held  to  convey  a  vested  interest  in 
the  quantity  of  land  mentioned  in  the  grant,  to  be  afterwards  laid 
off  by  official  authority  in  the  territory  described." 

The  exterior  limits  in  that  case  embraced  one  hundred  square 
leagues — the  grant  was  for  ten  square  leagues.  In  this  case  the 
exterior  limits  embrace  about  fifty  square  leagues,  while  the  quan- 
tity granted  is  limited  to  eleven. 

The  cases  seem  to  be  identical,  and  the  objection  under  that  de- 
cision cannot  be  maintained. 

The  above  are  the  only  grounds  assigned  by  the  Board  for  reject- 
ing this  claim. 

The  case  has  been  submitted  without  argument  on  the  part  of 
the  United  States,  or  the  suggestion  of  any  other  objections  to  its 
validity.  In  its  examination  and  decision  I  have  felt  an  anxious 
desire  correctly  to  understand  and  apply  the  principles  laid  down 
for  our  guidance  by  the  Supreme  Court,  and  if  I  have  in  any  re- 
spect misconstrued  or  misapplied  their  decision,  the  error  has  been 
involuntary. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  JACOB  P.  LEESE, 

CLAIMING  THE  RaNCHO  HuICHICA. 
This  claim  undoubtedly  valid. 

Claim  for  five  leagues  of  land  in  Sonoma  county,  confirmed  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  125 

United  States  v.  Castro. 

Stanly  &  King,  for  Appellee. 

The  claimant  in  this  case  obtained  on  the  twenty-first  of  Oc- 
tober, 1841,  a  grant  from  Manuel  Jimeno,  acting  Governor  of  Cal- 
ifornia, for  two  square  leagues  of  land,  as  designated  on  the  map 
which  accompanied  his  petition.  Juridical  possession  was  given  of 
the  tract  as  delineated  on  the  map,  but  the  extent  of  land  measured 
to  him  largely  exceeded  the  quantity  mentioned  in  the  grant.  He 
thereupon  petitioned  for  an  augmentation,  and  on  the  sixth  of  July, 
1844,  he  obtained  from  Governor  Micheltorena  an  additional  grant 
for  three  and  one-half  leagues,  making  in  all  five  leagues  and  a  half. 
The  proofs  show  that  as  early  as  1839  the  land  was  occupied,  and 
a  house  built  upon  it.  The  grantee  also  placed  there  cattle  and 
horses,  and  cultivated  about  two  hundred  acres  of  the  land.  He 
has  ever  since  continued  to  occupy  it. 

The  authenticity  of  the  grant  is  shown  by  proof  of  the  geunine- 
ness  of  the  signatures,  and  the  production  of  the  expediente  from 
the  archives  of  the  former  government.  The  claim  was  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  and  no  objections  to  it  are  suggested  in  this  Court. 

A  decree  of  confirmation  must  therefore  be  entered. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  RUFINA  CASTRO 
et  al.^  CLAIMING  THE  Rancho  Solis. 

The  nonproduction  of  the  grant  in  this  case  does  not  affect  the  validity  of  the 
claim,  the  loss  of  the  grant  being  proved,  and  long  and  notorious  occupation 
of  the  land  established. 

Claim  for  two  leagues  of  land  in  Santa  Clara  county,  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Stanly  &  King,  for  Appellees. 

The  only  doubt  that  can  be  raised  with  regard  to  the  validity  of 
this  claim  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  original  grant  is  not  pro 


U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


United  States  v.  Weber. 


cluced.  The  Board,  however,  after  considering  the  evidence  taken 
to  show  that  the  grant  had  been  dehvered  to  the  deceased  grantee, 
as  well  as  its  subsequent  loss,  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  it  duly 
issued  as  represented  in  the  petition.  The  fact  that  the  list  of 
grants  in  the  archives  contains  this  amongst  others,  the  parol  testi- 
mony of  several  witnesses  who  have  seen  it  and  known  that  it  was 
produced  and  referred  to,  to  settle  disputed  boundary  lines,  and  the 
still  more  conclusive  fact  that  the  grantee  and  his  family  have  re- 
sided upon  the  land  for  more  than  twenty  years,  are  sufficient  to 
remove  any  suspicions  which  the  nonproduction  of  the  grant  might 
otherwise  suggest.  An  occupation  so  long  continued  and  so  no- 
torious, with  a  claim  of  ownership  so  universally  recognized,  might 
of  itself  be  deemed  sufficient  evidence  of  ownership. 

The  claim  was  unanimously  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  we  see 
no  reason  for  reversing  their  judgment ;  nor  has  any  been  sug- 
gested on  the  part  of  the  United  States. 

A  decree  of  confirmation  must  therefore  be  entered. 


THE  UNITED    STATES,  Appellants,  vs,   CHARLES    M. 

WEBER,  CLAIMING  THE  RaNCHO  CaMPO  DE  LOS  FRANCESES. 

The  validity  of  this  claim  established  by  the  ruling  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Fre- 
mont's case. 

Claim  for  eleven  leagues  of  land  in  San  Joaquin  county,  con 
firmed  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

VoLNEY  E.  Howard,  for  Appellee. 

The  claim  in  this  case  was  confirmed  by  the  Board  of  Commis- 
sioners. An  appeal  to  this  Court  has  been  taken  on  the  part  ot 
the  United  States  ;  but  no  objections  to  the  claim  have  been  stated, 
nor  has  any  error  in  the  decision  of  the  Board  in  matters  of  law  or 
fact  been  suggested  for  our  consideration.    No  additional  testimony 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  127 

United  States  v.  Weber. 

has  been  taken  in  this  Court,  and  the  case  has  been  submitted 
without  argument,  except  a  printed  copy  of  the  brief  filed  by  the 
counsel  for  the  claimants  when  the  cause  was  pending  before  the 
Commissioners. 

I  have,  however,  as  has  been  my  practice,  examined  the  volum- 
inous transcript  in  the  case,  but  have  not  discovered  any  reason  for 
reversing  the  decision  of  the  Board. 

On  the  fourteenth  of  July,  1843,  Guillermo  Gulnac  petitioned 
Governor  Micheltorena  for  a  tract  of  land  eleven  leagues  in  extent, 
for  the  benefit  of  himself  and  eleven  other  families,  who  were  to 
assist  him  in  forming  a  settlement  upon  the  land. 

The  Secretary,  Jimeno,  to  whom  the  Governor  made  the  usual 
reference  for  information,  reported  on  the  twenty-eighth  of  Novem- 
ber, 1843,  that  although  Gulnac's  petition  was  entitled  to  favor- 
able consideration,  yet  it  should  be  ascertained  whether  the  peti- 
tioners desired  the  land  for  the  formation  of  a  colony  ;  and  that  in 
that  case  the  names  of  the  persons  who  were  to  form  it  should  be 
mentioned,  in  order  that  it  might  be  expressed  in  the  title  that  the 
grant  was  for  their  common  benefit ;  but  if  the  land  was  solicited 
for  the  personal  benefit  of  the  petitioner,  that  its  extent  was  large, 
and  others,  following  his  example,  might  obtain  similar  grants,  so 
that  no  pubhc  land  would  be  left. 

In  conformity  with  this  report,  the  Governor  ordered  that  the 
petitioner  should  say  whether  the  grant  was  asked  for  a  colony, 
and  that  in  that  case  the  names  of  the  families  should  be  stated  in 
the  title  ;  but  if  he  desired  it  for  himself  individually,  that  he 
should  ask  for  it  within  reasonable  limits. 

This  order  was  made  on  the  first  of  January,  1844  ;  but  on  the 
thirteenth  the  Governor  seems  to  have  made  his  concession  to  the 
petitioner  individually,  and  to  the  whole  extent  of  land  asked  for. 
The  concession,  it  is  true,  recites  that  the  grant  is  for  the  benefit 
of  Gulnac  and  his  family  and  that  of  eleven  other  families ;  but 
their  names  are  not  mentioned,  as  previously  suggested  by  the  Sec- 
retary, and  it  may  be  presumed  that  the  Governor  finally  deter- 
mined to  grant  the  land  to  Gulnac  alone,  leaving  him  to  make  such 
arrangements  with  the  famihes  who  were  to  settle  upon  the  land  as 
he  might  see  fit. 


128  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Weber. 

The  foregoing  facts  appear  from  the  expediente  on  file  m  the 
archives,  a  copy  of  which  is  contained  in  the  transcript. 

The  original  title  delivered  to  the  party  is  also  produced  by  the 
claimant,  and  the  genuineness  of  the  signatures  fully  proved. 

It  also  appears  from  the  certificate  attached  to  the  original  grant 
that  the  grant  was  approved  by  the  Departmental  Assembly  on  the 
fifteenth  of  June,  1846. 

By  virtue  of  this  approval  the  title  of  the  petitioner  became 
"  definitively  valid,"  and  the  legal  estate  in  fee  vested  in  the  grantee. 
Whether  in  such  a  case  this  Court  has  any  right  to  inquire  into  a 
breach  of  the  conditions  subsequent  annexed  to  the  grant,  for  the 
purpose  of  enforcing  any  forfeiture  for  conditions  broken  which  may 
have  accrued,  it  is  unnecessary  to  consider ;  for  the  evidence  in 
this  case  abundantly  shows  that  the  grantee  and  the  present  claim- 
ant, who  derive  title  from  him,  made  every  possible  exertion  to 
fulfill  the  conditions  of  the  grant,  and  that  though  embarrassed  by 
unforeseen  obstacles,  they  effected  an  extensive  settlement  upon 
the  land  before  the  country  was  ceded  to  the  United  States  by  the 
treaty.  The  excuses  for  nonperformance  of  conditions  within  the 
time  limited  are  at  least  as  valid  as  those  which  were  in  the  case 
of  Fremo7it  v.  The  United  States  held  sufficient  under  a  grant  not 
approved  by  the  Assembly,  and  in  this  case  it  appears  in  addition 
that  the  conditions  were  fully  performed,  and  in  fact  a  future  city 
founded  before  the  formal  acquisition  of  the  country.  No  objec- 
tions having  been  made  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  I  do  not 
deem  it  necessary  to  refer  particularly  to  the  evidence  by  which 
the  existence  of  unforeseen  obstacles  to  an  immediate  settlement  is 
estabhshed,  nor  to  that  which  proves  the  extensive  improvement, 
occupation  and  cultivation  which  ensued,  and  which  exist  to  the 
present  day. 

The  boundaries  of  the  grant  are  indicated  with  apparent  pre- 
cision in  the  grant  and  map  which  accompanies  it,  and  its  extent  is 
limited  to  eleven  leagues. 

A  decree  of  confirmation  for  land  to  that  extent,  within  the 
boundaries  set  forth  in  the  grant  and  accompanying  disefio,  must 
therefore  be  entered. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  129 


United  States  v.  Rcid. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  SAMUEL  G.  REID 

et  al,  CLAIMING  THE  Rancho  del  Puerto. 

The  validity  of  tliis  claim  not  controverted. 

Claim  for  three  leagues  of  land  in  San  Joaquin  county,  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

A.  C.  Whitcomb,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  was  affirmed  by  the  late  Board  of  Com- 
missioners. No  additional  testimony  has  been  taken  in  this  Court, 
and  the  case  has  been  submitted  without  argument  or  objection  on 
the  part  of  the  United  States. 

The  grant  under  which  the  claim  is  made  was  issued  by  Governor 
Micheltorena  on  the  twentieth  of  January,  1844.  The  signatures 
to  the  original  document,  produced  by  the  interested  parties,  are 
fully  proved,  and  the  expediente  is  found  in  the  archives  and  duly 
certified  by  the  Surveyor  General.  That  the  grant  was  made  does 
not  seem  to  admit  of  any  question,  and  though  from  an  error  in 
drawing  the  diseilo  the  positions  of  the  San  Joaquin  river  on  one 
side  and  the  serranias  on  the  other  are  incorrectly  delineated,  and 
should  be  reversed,  yet  the  calls  in  the  grant,  the  natural  objects 
mentioned  in  the  disefio,  the  specification  of  the  lindero  or  bound- 
ary of  Higuera's  rancho  as  one  of  the  boundaries  of  the  tract  now 
claimed,  together  with  the  deposition  of  Hernandez  contained  in 
the  transcript,  are  abundantly  sufficient  to  explain  and  correct  the 
error. 

With  regard  to  the  occupation  and  settlement  of  the  land,  it  is 
shown  that  the  conditions  were  in  that  respect  complied  with  within 
the  time  limited.  The  fact  that  owing  to  the  depredations  of  the 
Indians  the  grantees  were  driven  from  their  property  after  the 
murder  of  Linsay,  cannot  of  course  prejudice  their  claim. 

The  mesne  conveyances  are  proved  and  appear  to  be  regular, 
and  there  seems  to  be  no  reason  for  reversing  the  decree  of  the 
Board. 

A  decree  of  confirmation  must  therefore  be  entered. 


130  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Heirs  of  Chabolla  v.  United  States. 

THE  HEIRS  OF  ANASTASIO  CHABOLLA,  CLAmmG  the 

RaNCHO    SaUJON   DE   LOS   MOQUELEMES,  APPELLANTS,  VS.  THE 

UNITED  STATES. 

This  claim  must  be  confirmed  under  the  ruling  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Fre- 
mont's case. 

Claim  for  eight  leagues  of  land  in  San  Joaquin  county,  rejected 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  claimants. 

A.  P.  Crittenden,  for  Appellants. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  grantee  in  this  case,  on  the  seventeenth  of  May,  1843,  ad- 
dressed a  petition  to  the  Governor,  representing  that  he  had,  some 
sixteen  months  previously,  applied  for  a  grant  of  land  designated  on 
a  map,  which  he  inclosed.  This  application,  he  stated,  had  been 
referred  to  General  Sutter  and  the  Juzgado  of  the  Pueblo,  but  had 
been  wholly  neglected  by  them  ;  and  that  in  the  meantime  grants 
had  been  made  to  Gulnac  and  other  foreigners,  less  entitled  than 
himself  to  favorable  consideration.  He  therefore  prayed  the  Gov- 
ernor to  make  him  the  concession  as  originally  solicited.  The 
Governor  made  the  usual  marginal  decree  or  order  of  reference  for 
information,  and  the  Juzgado  of  the  Pueblo  of  San  Jos^  and  the 
Secretary,  Jimeno,  reported  favorably  to  Chabolla's  application. 

On  the  twenty-fourth  of  January,  1844,  the  Governor  made  his 
decree  of  concession,  granting  to  Chabolla  ''  eight  sitios  of  gafiado 
mayor  on  the  borders  of  the  river  Cosumnes  southward,  and  on  that 
of  the  San  Joaquin,"  the  possession  to  be  measured  two  leagues  on 
the  bank  of  the  River  San  Joaquin  and  the  rest  in  the  plain  running 
to  the  east. 

The  documento  or  title  delivered  to  the  grantee  corresponds  with 
the  decree  of  concession,  and  the  fourth  condition  states  that  the 
land  is  eight  leagues  in  extent,  to  be  measured  as  above  mentioned, 
and  according  to  the  diseno. 

The  foregoing  facts  appear  in  the  expediente  on  file  in  the 
archives,  and  in  the  title  produced  by  the  party,  the  signatures  to 
which  are  duly  proved. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  131 

Heirs  of  Chabolla  v.  United  States. 

No  approval  by  the  Departmental  Assembly  appears  to  have 
been  obtained,  nor  was  juridical  possession  of  the  land  given  to  the 
grantee.  The  usual  condition  of  cultivation  and  habitation  was  an- 
nexed to  the  grant,  and  the  question  arises  in  this  as  in  the  case  of 
Fremont,  "  whether  there  has  been  such  unreasonable  delay  or 
want  of  effort  on  the  part  of  the  grantee  to  fulfill  the  conditions  as 
will  justify  the  presumption  that  he  had  abandoned  his  claim,  and 
is  now  seeking  to  resume  it  from  the  enhanced  value  of  the  land." 
(17  How.  561.) 

The  grant  was  issued  in  January,  1844.  By  the  deposition  of 
Antonio  M.  Pico  it  appears  that  in  1846  or  1847,  there  were  upon 
the  rancho  three  hundred  head  of  cattle  and  forty  or  fifty  horses 
belonging  to  Chabolla  ;  there  was  also  at  that  time  a  house  on  the 
place,  in  which  an  overseer  hved,  with  Indian  servants,  and  corrals 
had  been  built  and  land  put  under  cultivation.  The  witness  states 
that  he  believes  the  cattle  had  been  taken  to  the  rancho  from  San 
Jose  in  1844. 

Henry  J.  Bee,  a  witness  whose  testimony  was  taken  in  this 
Court,  states  that  he  saw  Chabolla  on  his  place  in  1846  ;  that  he 
was  then  building  a  house  ;  and  that  in  1845  he  saw  him  driving 
cattle  up  there.  The  witness  visited  the  rancho  in  1848.  A  house 
had  then  been  built.  Sulinas,  the  steward  of  Chabolla  was  living 
there,  and  there  were  cattle  and  horses  upon  the  rancho  bearing 
Chabolla's  brand.  The  witness  adds  that  in  1845  he  did  not  go  to 
the  place  where  in  1846  he  saw  the  house. 

George  F.  Wyman,  whose  testimony  has  also  been  taken  since 
the  case  was  appealed,  states  that  in  1844  he  saw  a  man  named 
Sulinas  building  a  house  on  the  rancho  for  Chabolla,  as  he  said. 
The  house  was  situated  on  the  south  side  of  the  Cosumnes  river. 
The  witness  also  states  that  he  was  again  on  the  rancho  in  1845, 
and  from  time  to  time  for  three  or  four  years,  and  that  in  1848  he 
lived  several  months  in  Chabolla's  house.  In  1845  he  saw  cattle 
and  horses  there  marked  with  Chabolla's  brand ;  and  in  1846-7 
there  were  some  twenty  acres  of  land  inclosed  by  a  ditch,  dug  by 
Sulinas,  who  cultivated  wheat,  barley,  etc.,  within  the  inclosure. 

No  opposing  testimony  has  been  taken  on  the  part  of  the  United 
States. 


132  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Heirs  of  Chabolla  v.  United  States. 

Under  the  facts  as  disclosed  by  these  witnesses,  it  is  evident 
that  the  claimant  has  not  only  not  been  guilty  of  such  a  breach  of 
the  conditions  as  would  justify  the  presumption  that  he  had  aban- 
doned his  claim,  but  on  the  contrary  he  seems  to  have  proceeded 
to  settle  upon  and  cultivate  his  land  with  a  diligence  by  no  means 
usual  with  the  grantees  under  the  Mexican  Government.  I  think, 
therefore,  that  under  the  rules  laid  down  by  the  Supreme  Court  in 
the  case  of  Fremont,  the  objection  that  the  conditions  were  not  ful- 
filled cannot  be  maintained. 

This  claim  was  rejected  by  the  Board  for  the  nonfulfillment  of 
the  conditions ;  but  one  of  the  Commissioners  appears  to  have  con- 
curred in  the  decision  on  the  ground  that  no  proof  was  offered  to 
show  that  the  present  claimants  are  the  heirs  and  representatives  of 
Chabolla,  who  is  deceased.  That  objection,  whatever  force  it  may 
have  had,  is  obviated  by  the  testimony  of  Antonio  Chabolla,  a 
brother  of  the  grantee,  taken  in  this  Court. 

The  cause  has  been  submitted  without  argument  on  the  part  of 
the  United  States,  or  the  statement  of  any  objection  to  the  claim, 
except  a  reference  to  the  opinion  of  the  Board  as  containing  the 
grounds  on  which  the  United  States  rely  for  the  rejection  of  the 
claim.  It  is  not  mentioned  in  the  opinion  of  the  Board,  or  sug- 
gested on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  that  there  is  any  difficulty 
as  to  locating  the  land.  The  grant  mentions  that  the  land  is  sit- 
uated on  the  borders  of  the  Cosumnes  southward,  and  on  those  of 
the  San  Joaquin,  measuring  two  leagues  on  the  latter  river,  and 
the  remainder  of  the  tract  on  the  plain  to  the  east. 

The  description  of  the  land  in  the  grant  delivered  to  the  party, 
in  one  respect  differs  from  that  contained  in  the  decree  of  conces- 
sion. In  the  former,  the  land  is  described  as  lying  in  the  plain  to 
the  west  of  the  San  Joaquin.  But  this  is  evidently  a  clerical  error, 
for  the  map  of  the  country  shows  that  the  plain  out  of  which  the 
land  could  alone  be  taken  lies  to  the  east  of  the  San  Joaquin,  the 
land  to  the  west  being  a  broad  belt  of  marshy  land  covered  with 
tule,  and  if  located  to  the  west,  the  grant  would  not  touch  the  Cos- 
umnes, on  the  borders  of  which  to  the  south  it  is  described  as  situated. 

A  decree  of  confirmation  of  the  claim,  to  the  extent  of  eight 
leagues,  to  be  located  and  measured  as  set  forth  in  the  expediente, 
must  therefore  be  entered. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1855.  133 

United  States  v.  Heirs  of  Saiiclicz. 

THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  THE  HEIRS  OF 
JOSE  MARIA  SANCHEZ,  claiming  the  Rancho  Las  Ani- 
mas. 

The  objcetion  that  the  boundary  of  an  adjoining  rancho  is  affected  by  this  claim 
is  not  tenable,  the  controversy  being  between  and  concluding  the  United 
States  and  the  claimants  only. 

Claim  for  four  leagues  of  land  in  Santa  Clara  county,  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

S.  W.  Inge,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Thornton  &  Williams,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  is  founded  on  a  title  issued  by  Governor 
Eigueroa  to  the  widow  of  Mariano  Castro.  It  appears  from  the 
voluminous  documents  contained  in  the  expediente,  that  Josefa 
Romero,  the  widow  of  Castro,  petitioned  the  Governor  for  a  reval- 
idation of  the  title  of  her  husband,  or  in  case  the  papers  on  file  did 
not  authorize  such  a  proceeding,  then  for  a  new  grant  to  herself. 
The  Governor  directed  a  search  to  be  made  in  the  archives  for  the 
record  of  the  proceedings  relative  to  the  first  grant.  That  record 
is  embodied  in  a  report  of  the  Secretary  Negrete,  and  presented  to 
the  Governor  for  his  examination.  It  is  unnecessary  to  recapitulate 
these  documents,  or  to  examine  the  various  reports  and  records  of 
proceedings  before  the  Viceroy  of  New  Spain  on  Mariano  Castro's 
petition.  The  Governor  seems  to  have  been  satisfied  as  to  the  right 
of  Josefa  Romero  to  have  the  land  which  Mariano  Castro  had  oc- 
cupied for  many  years  confirmed  to  her.  He  accordingly  issued 
his  decree  recognizing  the  right  of  the  party  as  ascertained  from 
the  archives,  and  ordered  the  proper  testimonial  of  her  title  to  the 
property  to  be  issued  to  her.  In  this  decree  the  Governor  men- 
tions that  the  rancho  of  Las  Animas  has  been  possessed  by  Castro 
and  his  family  for  more  than  twenty  years  "  in  public  notoriety," 
and  as  their  right  is  proved  to  this  tract  granted  to  Castro  under 
the  name  of  La  Brea  by  the  Vice  Royal  Government  in  1802,  he 
ordered  a  testimonial  to  issue  for  their  protection,  and  inasmuch  as 


134  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Heirs  of  Sanchez. 

the  boundaries  are  not  expressly  defined  in  the  grant  of  the  Vice- 
roy, the  parties  must  confine  themselves  to  those  set  forth  in  the 
petition  filed  on  the  part  of  Rufina  Romero,  leaving  uninjured  the 
rights  of  any  third  party  who  may  consider  himself  aggrieved  by  the 
proceedings. 

The  authenticity  of  all  the  documents  in  the  case  is  proved,  and 
the  long  continued  habitation  and  cultivation  of  the  rancho  for 
nearly  half  a  century  by  those  under  whom  the  appellees  claim, 
leave  no  doubt  as  to  the  validity  of  the  title.  It  was  accordingly 
unanimously  confirmed  by  the  Board. 

Much  testimony  has  been  taken  on  the  part  of  the  claimants  of 
the  adjoining  rancho  of  San  Ysidro  to  prove  the  precise  location  of 
the  boundaries  between  that  rancho  and  the  rancho  of  Las  Animas. 
But  it  has  already  been  determined  by  this  Court  and  the  Board  of 
Commissioners  that  the  rights  of  third  parties  cannot  be  adjudicated 
in  this  form,  and  that  the  question  to  be  determined  in  this  class  of 
cases  is  merely  the  validity  of  the  claim  as  against  the  United 
States.  Between  the  United  States  and  the  claimants  final  decrees 
in  these  suits  are  conclusive,  but  the  Act  of  1851  expressly  de- 
clares that  such  decrees  shall  not  affect  the  interests  of  third  per- 
sons. All  questions  between  claimants  arising  out  of  a  conflict  of 
boundaries  are  by  the  thirteenth  section  of  that  act  more  appropri- 
ately referred,  in  the  first  instance,  to  the  Surveyor  General,  but 
leaving  to  the  parties  the  right  of  resorting  to  the  proper  judicial 
tribunals. 

As  the  "  testimonial "  or  decree  made  by  the  Governor  mentions 
the  boundaries  of  the  tract  of  "  Las  Animas"  to  be  those  indicated 
in  the  disefio  which  accompanies  the  petition,  leaving  uninjured  the 
right  of  any  third  party  who  may  consider  himself  aggrieved  by  the 
proceeding,  the  rights  of  such  parties  would  seem  to  have  been 
intended  to  be  left  in  the  same  condition  as  under  patent  issued  by 
the  United  States  under  the  law  of  1851. 

It  is  clear  from  the  terms  of  the  testimonial  that  the  Governor 
intended  to  confirm  and  recognize  the  rights  of  the  petitioners  to 
the  land  of  which  they  had  long  been  in  possession ;  and  that  so 
far  as  the  Government  was  concerned,  he  was  willing  to  adopt  the 
boundaries  indicated  by  the  petitioners  on  the  diseno.     But  those 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  135 

United  States  v.  Ortega. 

boundaries  were  not  intended  to  be  conclusive  upon  the  rights  of 
others,  and  the  reservation  made  in  the  decree  clearly  shows  that 
if,  in  delineating  the  boundaries  of  the  tract  of  which  they  claimed 
to  be  owners,  the  petitioners  had  exceeded  its  true  limits  or  included 
the  lands  of  others,  the  rights  of  such  parties  were  not  intended  to 
be  prejudiced  by  the  decree  of  concession. 

I  think,  therefore,  that  a  decree  should  be  entered  in  this  Court 
in  conformity  with  the  decree  of  the  Governor,  and  that  the  title 
of  the  claimants  should  be  confirmed  to  the  land  according  to  the 
boundaries  indicated  on  the  diseno,  but  without  prejudice  to  the 
rights  of  any  parties  who  may  be  injured  by  such  location. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  QUINTIN  ORTE- 
GA et  al.,  CLAIMING  PART  OF  THE  RaNCHO  SanYsIDRO. 

This  claim  is  valid  for  the  portion  petitioned  for  by  Maria  Clara  Ortega  and 
Julius  Martin. 

Claim  for  one  league  of  land  in  Santa  Clara  county,  confirmed  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Stanly  &  King,  for  Appellees. 

It  appears  from  the  expediente  on  file  in  the  archives  that  Quin- 
tin  Ortega,  in  the  year  1833,  petitioned  Governor  Figueroa  for  a 
title  to  a  tract  of  land  granted  to  his  father,  Ignacio  Ortega,  by 
Don  Joaquin  Arrillaga,  in  1809.  The  Governor  made  the  usual 
reference  for  information,  and  by  the  reports  made  to  him  it  ap- 
peared that  for  more  than  twenty  years,  and  in  fact  from  1809  until 
his  decease  in  1829  or  1830,  the  land  had  belonged  to  and  been  in 
possession  of  Ignacio  Ortega,  and  that  since  that  time  his  son  and 
two  daughters  had  continued  to  occupy  it. 

On  the  third  of  June,  1833,  the  Governor  made  his  concession, 
granting  to  Quintin  Ortega  and  his  sisters,  Maria  Clara  Ortega  and 


136  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Ortega. 

Maria  Isabel  Ortega,  the  rancho  called  San  Ysidro,  bounded  by  the 
Mission  of  San  Juan  Bautista,  by  the  ranchos  of  Animas  and  Las 
Llagas,  and  by  the  mountains — "  the  land  being  conceded  in  equal 
parts  and  subject  to  the  stipulated  conditions." 

These  conditions,  it  is  evident  from  the  subsequent  proceedings, 
related  to  the  division  of  the  land  among  the  grantees,  for  the  Gov- 
ernor appears  to  have  issued  three  documentos  or  titles,  each  grant- 
ing a  third  part  of  the  land  included  within  the  boundaries  em- 
braced in  his  decree  of  concession. 

By  the  documento  issued  to  Maria  Clara  Ortega,  wife  of  John 
Gilroy,  there  was  granted  to  her  a  part  of  the  rancho  of  San  Ysidro, 
bounded  by  the  Rancho  de  Las  Animas  and  the  mountain,  and  the 
parts  which  appertain  to  her  brother  Quintin  and  her  sister  Maria 
Isabel.  The  quantity  of  land  granted  is  limited  to  one  square 
league,  and  the  sobrante  is  reserved  in  the  usual  terms. 

This  grant,  as  well  as  those  to  Quintin  and  Maria  Isabel  for  their 
portions  of  the  rancho,  was  approved  by  the  Departmental  Assem- 
bly on  the  seventeenth  of  May,  1834.  There  seems  to  be  no  doubt 
of  the  genuineness  of  the  grants  in  these  cases,  or  of  the  occupa- 
tion and  cultivation  of  the  land  by  the  grantees  and  their  father 
since  1809, 

It  appears  from  the  opinion  of  the  Board  of  Commissioners  that 
the  claim  of  Quintin  Ortega  to  the  portion  of  San  Ysidro  granted 
to  him,  was  confirmed  in  a  separate  suit  instituted  on  his  behalf,  and 
as  the  petition  filed  does  not  embrace  the  claim  of  Maria  Isabel, 
there  only  remains  to  be  passed  upon  in  this  case  the  claim  of 
Maria  Clara  and  that  of  JuHus  Martin,  who  derives  his  title  by 
deed  from  her  and  her  husband,  dated  January  8th,  1852. 

With  respect  to  the  boundary  line  of  "  Las  Animas,"  which  is 
also  the  boundary  of  that  portion  of  San  Ysidro  granted  to  Maria 
Clara,  some  disputes  have  arisen.  But  for  the  reasons  assigned  in 
the  opinion  in  that  case,  such  disputes  cannot  in  this  proceeding  be 
settled. 

It  is  clear  that  both  claims  are  valid  as  against  the  United  States. 
The  precise  location  of  the  boundary  line  between  the  coterminous 
ranchos  must  be  settled  either  by  the  Surveyor  General  or  by  the 
proper  tribunals  of  the  country. 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  137 

United  States  v.  Grimes. 

The  claimant,  Maria  Clara  Ortega,  is,  therefore,  entitled  to  a 
decree  of  confirmation  for  the  portion  of  San  Ysidro  granted  to  her 
to  the  extent  of  one  league,  and  bounded  as  described  in  the  grant, 
excepting  therefrom  the  part  conveyed  by  her  and  her  husband  to 
Julius  Martin,  for  which  a  decree  must  be  entered  in  favor  of  said 
Martin. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  HIRAM  GRIMES, 

CLAIMING  THE  RaNCHO  SaN  JuAN. 
No  objections  to  the  confirmation  of  this  claim. 

Claim  for  four  and  a  half  leagues  of  land  in  Sacramento  county, 
confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

A.  C.  Whitcomb,  for  Appellee. 

The  claimant  in  this  case  derives  his  title  by  deed  from  Joel  P. 
Dedmond,  the  original  grantee.  The  grant  issued  to  Dedmond  by 
Governor  Micheltorena  on  the  twenty- fourth  of  December,  1844,  is 
duly  proved,  and  the  expediente  containing  the  petition,  diseno  and 
other  usual  documents,  is  found  in  the  archives. 

With  regard  to  the  performance  of  the  conditions  there  is  some 
discrepancy  in  the  testimony.  But  the  witness  O'Brien  is  shown 
not  to  have  been  in  the  country  at  the  time  he  swears  that  no  house 
existed,  and  his  character  would  seem  to  be  such  as  to  entitle  his 
testimony,  even  if  uncontradicted,  to  but  little  weight. 

But  the  testimony  of  Buzzell,  Wyman  and  Leahey,  witnesses  to 
whom  Hicks,  who  was  sworn  on  behalf  of  the  United  States,  ex- 
pressly refers  as  best  acquainted  with  the  facts,  shows  beyond  all 
reasonable  doubt  that  a  house  was  built  and  a  portion  of  the  land 
cultivated  as  required  by  the  conditions ;  and  the  rancho  seems  to 
have  been  in  the  possession  of  Dedmond  and  his  grantees  Sinclair 
and  Grimes,  up  to  the  present  time. 


138  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Payson. 

The  location  of  the  land  is  said  by  the  Commissioners  to  have 
been  estabUshed  with  sufficient,  though  not  with  great,  precision. 
In  the  grant  it  is  described  as  bounded  on  the  west  by  the  place 
belonging  to  Seilor  Grimes,  on  the  south  by  the  American  river,  on 
the  east  by  the  foot  of  the  Sierra  Nevada,  and  on  the  north  by 
vacant  lands,  being  in  extent  from  east  to  west  three  leagues,  and 
from  north  to  south  one  league  and  a  half. 

The  claimant  has  put  in  evidence  the  expediente  in  the  case  of 
E.  Grimes,  whose  land  "  El  Paso  "  is  one  of  the  boundaries  of  the 
rancho  now  claimed.  It  appears  by  this  expediente  that  the  loca- 
tion and  boundaries  of  El  Paso  are  defined  with  unusual  precision, 
a  point  of  beginning  being  distinctly  stated,  and  the  courses  and 
distances  of  all  the  hnes  given. 

There  would  seem,  therefore,  with  the  boundary  line  which  sepa- 
rates El  Paso  from  the  Rancho  of  San  Juan  now  claimed,  accurately 
established,  with  the  American  river  and  the  foot  of  the  Sierra  as 
the  limits  on  the  south  and  east,  and  the  extent  of  the  land  from 
north  to  south  and  from  east  to  west  expressly  stated,  to  be  no 
difficulty  in  locating  this  with  all  the  accuracy  necessary. 

This  claim  was  confirmed  by  the  Board.  No  new  testimony  has 
been  taken  in  this  Court,  nor  has  any  argument  been  offered  or 
suggestion  made  to  the  Court  of  any  reason  for  reversing  the  de- 
cision of  the  Commissioners. 

I  think  that  a  decree  confirming  the  claim  should  be  entered. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  ys.  HENRY  R.  PAY- 
SON,  CLAIMING  THE  RaNCHO  CaNADA  DE  GuADALUPE. 

The  validity  of  this  claim  undoubted. 

Claim  for  two  leagues  of  land  in  San  Francisco  county,  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

E.  0.  Crosby,  for  Appellee. 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  139 


United  States  v.  Bernal. 


The  claim  in  this  case  was  confirmed  bj  the  Board,  and  it  has 
been  submitted  on  appeal  without  additional  evidence,  or  the  state- 
ment on  the  part  of  the  appellants  of  any  objection  to  the  validity 
of  the  claim.  I  have  however,  as  has  been  my  practice,  examined 
the  transcript  on  file,  but  have  discovered  no  ground  for  reversing 
the  decision  of  the  Board. 

The  authenticity  of  the  original  grant  seems  undoubted,  and  the 
expediento  is  produced  from  the  archives  confirmed  by  a  record  or 
note  of  the  grant  in  the  book  in  which  such  entries  were  made. 
The  land  was  occupied  by  the  original  grantee  within  the  time 
limited,  and  appears  ever  since  to  have  been  held  by  him  and  his 
grantees  as  its  notorious  and  recognized  owners. 

The  mesne  conveyances  appear  to  be  regular  and  to  vest  the 
title  to  the  land  claimed  by  him  in  the  present  claimant. 

A  decree  confirming  the  decision  of  the  Board  must  therefore  be 
entered. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  AGUSTIN  BER- 
NAL, CLAIMING  THE  RaNCHO  SaNTA  TeRESA. 

The  validity  of  this  claim  not  disputed. 

Claim  for  one  league  of  land  in  Santa  Clara  county,  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

B.  W.  Leigh,  for  Appellee. 

The  claim  in  this  case  was  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  it  has 
been  submitted  to  this  Court  on  appeal  without  argument  on  the 
part  of  the  United  States. 

The  claim  seems  to  be  one  of  the  most  meritorious  which  have 
been  presented  for  our  consideration. 

The  petition  of  Joaquin  Bernal  bears  date  on  the  tenth  of  May, 
1834,  and  states  that  the  petitioner  was  an  invalid  soldier  ninety- 
10 


140  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Bernal. 

four  years  old,  and  with  a  posterity  of  seventy-eight  souls.  That 
he  had  entered  into  possession  of  the  place  soKcited  five  years 
before,  by  permission  of  the  Ayuntamiento  of  the  Pueblo  of  San 
Jose,  and  that  he  and  his  family  had  built  four  adobe  houses,  and 
had  continued  to  occupy  the  land  with  his  property  consisting  of 
twenty-one  hundred  head  of  cattle,  one  hundred  and  twenty  sheep, 
three  mares  and  fifty  tame  horses,  etc. 

The  Governor,  after  the  usual  references,  acceded  to  the  peti- 
tion, and  the  concession  was  confirmed  by  the  Departmental  As- 
sembly, with  a  slight  modification  of  the  boundaries  of  the  tract — 
the  Assembly  having  decided  on  the  appHcation  of  Juan  Alvirez 
to  except  out  of  the  land  the  portion  claimed  by  the  latter.  In 
accordance  with  this  resolution,  the  title  was  issued  to  Bernal  on 
the  eleventh  of  July,  1834. 

In  the  month  of  July,  1835,  Bernal  apphed  to  the  Constitutional 
Alcalde  of  San  Jose  for  judicial  possession  of  the  tract  granted, 
which  was  accordingly  given  by  that  ofiicer. 

The  genuineness  of  the  original  title  is  clearly  proved,  as  well  as 
that  of  the  ''  testimonio  "  or  certificate  delivered  to  the  grantee  by 
the  officer  giving  judicial  possession.  To  this  latter  instrument 
were  prefixed  the  original  grant  and  a  copy  of  the  map  contained 
in  the  expediente.  The  latter  document  is  also  duly  produced 
from  the  archives,  and  the  genuineness  of  the  claim  is  established 
beyond  all  doubt  by  the  production  of  all  the  evidence  of  every 
kind  which  can  be  adduced  in  support  of  a  grant  by  the  former 
Government  of  this  country.  From  the  year  1826  until  the  present 
time,  the  land  has  been  occupied  under  an  unquestioned  title  by 
the  grantee  and  his  numerous  descendants.  The  only  doubt  sug- 
gested in  this  case  arises  from  an  alleged  error  in  the  boundaries, 
as  fixed  by  the  officers  giving  judicial  possession.  But  on  closely 
examining  the  proofs,  there  does  not  seem  any  reason  to  suppose 
such  an  error  to  have  been  committed.  The  survey  on  which  re- 
liance was  placed  as  establishing  that  the  tract  of  which  possession 
was  given  exc-eeded  in  extent  the  quantity  granted,  appears  to 
have  been  exceedingly  inaccurate,  for  independently  of  the  mis- 
take of  calculation  apparent  on  the  scale  appended  to  the  survey- 
or's map,  it  is  also  shown  that  the  tract  surveyed,  and  the  extent  of 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  141 


United  States  v.  Pope. 


which  he  attempts  to  establish,  included  a  considerable  quantity  of 
land  not  comprised  within  the  boundaries  established  by  the  officer 
who  gave  judicial  possession.  On  the  whole  case  there  seems  no 
reason  to  suppose  that  the  tract  of  which  possession  was  given,  and 
of  which  the  grantee  and  his  heirs  have  enjoyed  the  undisputed 
and  notorious  possession  for  more  than  thirty  years,  differs  either 
in  quantity  or  as  to  boundaries,  from  that  described  in  the  grant 
and  the  map  to  which  it  refers. 

The  opinion  of  the  Commissioners  is  so  full  and  conclusive  on  this 
point,  that  it  is  not  deemed  necessary  to  discuss  it  further,  particu- 
larly as  the  objection  has  not  been  urged  in  this  Court,  or  any  at- 
tempt to  impair  the  force  of  the  reasoning,  or  correctness  of  the 
conclusion  of  the  Board. 

We  think,  therefore,  that  a  decree  of  confirmation  should  be 
entered  for  the  land,  as  described  in  the  grant,  and  according  to 
the  boundaries  fixed  in  the  act  of  judicial  possession. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs,  JOSEPH  POPE  et 
al,  Heirs  op  Julian  Pope,  deceased,  claiming  the  Rancho 

LOCOALLOMIA. 
The  validity  of  this  claim  fully  established. 

Claim  for  two  leagues  of  land  in  Napa  county,  confirmed  by  the 
Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

McDouGAL,  Aldrich  &  Sharp,  for  Appellees. 

In  September,  1841,  Juhan  Pope  appUed  to  General  Yallejo 
for  an  order  for  the  provisional  occupation  of  the  premises  now 
claimed. 

The  land  having  been  reported  to  be  vacant,  permission  to  oc- 
cupy and  to  apply  for  the  usual  title  was  given  to  the  applicant. 

Julian  Pope  accordingly  petitioned  the  Government  for  a  grant, 


142  U,  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Pico  V.  United  States. 

and  on  the  thirtieth  of  September,  the  usual  title  was  issued  by 
Jimeno,  giving  to  Pope  the  place  called  Locoallomia,  of  two  sitios 
de  gauado  mayor. 

The  above  facts  are  established  by  the  grant,  which  is  produced 
and  duly  proven,  and  by  the  expediente,  which  is  found  in  the 
archives,  and  a  copy  of  which  duly  certified  is  on  file. 


ANTONIO  MARIA  PICO  et  al.,  claiming  the  Rancho  El 
Pescadeko,  Appellants,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

Entitled  to  confirmation  under  the  ruling  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Fremont's 
case. 

Claim  for  eight  leagues  of  land  in  San  Joaquin  county,  rejected 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  claimants. 

LocKWOOD,  Tyler  &  Wallace,  for  Appellants. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  is  founded  on  a  grant  issued  by  Governor 
Micheltorena,  bearing  date  the  twenty-eighth  day  of  November, 
1843. 

The  expediente  is  produced  from  the  archives,  and  the  original 
grant  delivered  to  the  party  interested — the  authenticity  of  which 
is  duly  proved. 

The  claim  was,  however,  rejected  by  the  Board,  on  the  ground 
that  the  conditions  of  the  grant  had  not  been  performed,  and  that 
no  legal  excuse  for  nonperformance  had  been  offered.' 

This  decision  was  rendered  before  the  case  of  Fremont  was 
determined  by  the  Supreme  Court.  In  the  statement  of  the  case 
filed  by  the  counsel  for  the  appellants  no  argument  is  offered  on  the 
points  involved  in  the  case,  the  expectation  being  confidently  enter- 
tained that  the  rules  laid  down  in  the  United  States  v.  Fremont 
would  govern  the  case.  On  the  part  of  the  United  States  no  argu- 
ment i^  submitted,  the  Court  being  merely  referred  to  the  objections 
urged  in  similar  cases. 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  143 

Pico  V.  United  States. 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  point  involved  in  this  case  was  not 
debated  by  counsel,  and  that  the  Court  is  obliged  to  arrive  at  a 
conclusion  unassisted  by  arguments  at  the  bar. 

It  is  not  pretended  that  the  grantee  ever  complied,  during  the 
existence  of  the  former  Government,  with  the  conditions  of  the 
grant. 

By  the  testimony  of  A.  Suilol  it  appears  that  "  soon  after  Pico 
received  his  grant  he  prepared  to  remove  his  cattle  on  his  rancho, 
but  the  Indians  became  hostile  about  this  time  and  murdered  Gul- 
nac's  mayor  domo  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  and  prevented 
Pico  from  settling  on  his  land.  From  this  time  until  1848  and 
1849  the  Indians  continued  hostile,  and  robbed  the  ranches  down  to 
the  valley  of  San  Jose.  In  1847,  troops  w^ere  sent  against  them, 
but  they  continued  their  depredations  until  after  the  discovery  of 
gold  in  1848." 

The  conditions  attached  to  grants  in  California  were  clearly  con- 
ditions subsequent,  and  by  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in 
the  case  of  Fremont  v.  United  States  it  is  established  that  the 
grant  of  the  Governor,  although  unconfirmed  by  the  Departmental 
Assembly,  "  vested  in  the  grantee  a  present  and  immediate  inter- 
est." It  is  true  that  the  grant  in  that  case  alluded  to  the  meritori- 
ous services  of  the  grantee ;  but  independently  of  the  fact  that  the 
Governors  do  not  seem  to  have  been  authorized  by  the  Colonization 
Laws  to  recompense  such  services  by  grants  of  land,  and  could  at 
most  only  consider  them  as  entitling  the  applicant  to  a  preference 
over  other  petitioners,  it  is  clear  that  the  grants  being  in  the  same 
terms  must  receive  the  same  construction,  whatever  consideration 
may  have  moved  the  Governor  to  make  them.  The  law  under 
which  he  acted  was  intended  to  secure  the  settlement  of  the  country 
by  providing  for  the  distribution  of  the  public  land  among  colonists 
and  settlers.  To  such  alone  the  Governor  w^as  authorized  to  grant, 
and  we  accordingly  find  that  in  almost  all  cases  conditions  were  an- 
nexed to  the  grant  requiring  the  occupation  and  cultivation  of  the 
ceded  land.  Under  our  system  the  same  result  is  attained  by  with- 
holding the  patent  or  final  title  until  after  the  person  who  has  enter- 
ed the  land  has  effected  a  permanent  settlement  upon  it.  Under 
the  Mexican  law,  however,  a  full  title  issued  in  the  first  instance 


144  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Pico  V.  United  States. 

but  conditions  were  attached  to  it  providing  for  a  forfeiture  in  case 
the  grantee,  by  omitting  to  occupy  and  settle  upon  his  land,  defeat- 
ed the  policy  of  the  Government,  and  failed  to  furnish  what  was 
the  sole  consideration  of  the  grant. 

The  grants,  then,  passed  a  present  and  immediate  interest  to  the 
grantee,  subject,  however,  to  conditions  subsequent ;  and  such  was 
their  effect  not  only  when  the  Departmental  Assembly  had  con- 
firmed, but  even,  as  decided  in  the  case  of  Fremont,  without  such 
confirmation. 

From  this  general  statement  it  is,  we  think,  apparent  that  the 
principles  established  in  that  case  apply  to  all  colonization  grants 
made  under  the  regulations  of  1828,  and  cannot  be  restricted  to 
those  alone  in  which  the  meritorious  services  of  the  grantee  may 
happen  to  be  alluded  to  in  the  grant. 

This  grant,  then,  like  that  to  Alvarado  in  the  case  referred  to, 
having  vested  in  the  grantee  a  present  and  immediate  interest,  the 
inquiry,  as  in  that  case,  is  "  whether  there  has  been  any  unreason- 
able delay  or  want  of  effort  on  the  part  of  the  grantee  to  fulfill  its 
conditions,  and  whether  there  is  room  for  the  presumption  that  the 
party  had  abandoned  his  claim  before  the  Mexican  power  ceased 
to  exist  and  is  now  endeavoring  to  resume  it  from  its  enhanced 
value." 

The  facts  in  the  case  of  Fremont,  in  which  it  was  held  that  no 
unreasonable  delay  had  occurred,  and  that  no  such  presumption 
arose,  were  estabhshed  in  a  manner  much  more  satisfactory  than 
those  relied  on  in  this  case.  It  may  not  be  "  very  clear,"  as  in  that 
case,  that  during  the  continuance  of  the  Mexican  power  it  was  im- 
possible to  have  made  a  survey  or  built  a  house  on  the  land,  but  the 
fact  exists  in  this  case,  as  in  that^  that  no  one  else  proposed  to  settle 
on  it  or  denounced  it  for  nonfulfillment  of  the  conditions. 

The  testimony  of  Sunol,  though  less  full  and  satisfactory  than 
could  be  wished,  nevertheless  shows  that  the  obstacles  to  the  settle- 
ment were  nearly  identical  with  those  which  prevented  Alvarado 
from  complying  with  the  conditions  of  his  grant. 

The  grant  to  Pico  is  dated  November,  1843,  while  that  to  Al- 
varado was  issued  in  February,  1844 — only  three  months  after- 
wards.    The  general  condition  of  the  country,  and  the  political 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  145 

Pico  V.  United  States. 

disturbances  which  prevented  a  settlement  in  the  one  case  must 
have  interposed  obstacles  equally  insurmountable  in  the  other. 

But  the  inquiry  is  not  whether  the  grantee  could,  by  possibility, 
have  effected  a  settlement  on  his  land,  but  whether  his  delay  has 
been  unreasonable,  and  so  unreaso7iahle  as  to  furnish  a  presumption 
that  he  abandoned  his  claim,  and  that  he  is  now  fraudulently  at- 
tempting to  re^me  it. 

Under  the  evidence  we  feel  constrained  to  say,  that  his  delay  is 
not  only  susceptible  of  an  explanation  consistent  with  the  absence  of 
any  intention  on  his  part  to  abandon  his  claim,  but  that  it  seems  to 
have  been  caused  by  circumstances  over  which  he  had  no  control, 
and  which  probably  rendered  it  unavoidable. 

It  may  be  urged  that  in  this  case  the  Governor  did  not,  as  in 
the  case  of  Alvarado,  dispense  with  the  diseuo  or  plan  which  usu- 
ally accompanied  the  petition ;  and  that  the  presumption  does  not 
arise  in  this  case,  as  in  that,  that  the  Governor,  by  "  officially  ad- 
mitting that  the  land  was  situated  in  such  a  wilderness  and  bordered 
by  such  dangerous  neighbors  as  that  no  plan  could  be  prepared," 
impUedly  recognized  the  impracticabiHty  of  effecting  a  settlement 
within  the  time.  There  is  some  force,  perhaps,  in  this  suggestion. 
But  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  the  Governor  expressly  imposed 
upon  Alvarado  the  condition  of  making  his  settlement  within  the 
year  ;  and  if  his  dispensing  with  the  disefio  might  be  considered  as  a 
recognition  of  the  fact  that  the  condition  of  the  country  might 
occasion  delays,  and  that  such  delays  would  not  be  deemed  unrea- 
sonable, the  circumstance  that  he,  notwithstanding,  insisted  in  the 
second  condition  on  the  settlement  within  the  usual  time,  in  some 
degree  at  least  impairs  the  force  of  the  argument.  The  insertion 
of  the  condition  is  not,  Tiowever^  so  conclusive  on  this  point  as  it 
might  appear  ;  for  the  dispensing  with  the  diseiio  was  an  unusual 
and  exceptional  indulgence  of  the  Governor,  in  granting  which  he 
exercised  a  discretion  after  his  attention  had  been  attracted  to  the 
subject,  while  the  insertion  of  the  usual  conditions  in  the  grant  was 
probably  the  work  of  some  clerk,  who  drew  up  the  paper  in  the 
usual  form,  and  without  reference  to  any  peculiar  circumstances 
attending  it. 

The  insertion  of  the  conditions  could,  moreover,  under  the  Mex- 


146  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Martin  v.  United  States. 

ican  law,  have  naturally  been  but  little  regarded  by  the  grantee,  for 
he  knew  that  so  long  as  he  was  unable  to  effect  a  settlement  no  one 
else  would  be,  and,  as  observed  by  the  Supreme  Court,  that  the 
grant  would  not  be  forfeited  unless  some  other  person  desired  and 
was  ready  to  occupy  the  land. 

I  do  not  perceive,  therefore,  that  the  fact  that  the  Governor  in 
the  case  of  Fremont  dispensed  with  the  disefio,  wliile  in  this  case 
it  was  duly  submitted  with  the  petition,  furnishes  ground  for  abroad 
distinction  between  that  case  and  this. 

The  important  and  the  sole  question  is,  as  propounded  by  the 
Supreme  Court  in  the  case  so  often  referred  to,  "  whether  any 
thing  done  or  omitted  to  be  done  by  the  grantee  during  the  exist- 
ence of  the  Mexican  Government  in  California, /o?/eiYe(i  the  inter- 
est he  had  acquired,  and  revested  it  in  the  Government." 

Such  forfeiture  could  only  have  been  incurred  by  unreasonable 
delay  or  want  of  effort  on  his  part  to  fulfill  the  conditions ;  and 
such  as  to  raise  the  presumption  that  he  had  abandoned  his  claim. 

It  being  shown  in  this  case  that  the  delay  arose  from  obstacles 
which  may  be  regarded  as  insuperable,  that  it  was  not  only  not 
unreasonable,  but  probably  unavoidable,  no  presumption  of  abandon- 
ment can  arise ;  and  the  title  not  having  been  "  forfeited  and 
revested  in  the  Government,  remained,  at  the  time  the  sovereignty 
passed  to  the  United  States,  vested  in  the  grantee,  and  the  United 
States  are  bound  in  good  faith  to  uphold  and  protect  it."  (17 
How.  55T.) 

A  decree  of  confirmation  must  therefore  be  entered. 


JULIUS  MARTIN,  claiming  part  of  the  Rancho  Entre 
Napa,  Appellant,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

This  claim  entitled  to  confirmation  as  against  the  United  States,  but  without  prej- 
udice to  third  parties. 

Claim  for  one  square  mile  of  land  in  Napa  county,  rejected  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimant. 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  147 


Martin  v.  United  States. 


Stanly  &  King,  for  Appellant. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  of  the  appellant  in  this  case  is  founded  on  a  grant 
made  in  1836  by  Governor  Manuel  Chico  to  Nicolas  Higuera. 
The  authenticity  of  this  grant  is  fully  proved,  nor  does  its  validity 
appear  to  have  been  questioned  either  by  the  Board  or  the  law 
agent  of  the  United  States.  The  original  grant  and  the  expediente 
from  the  archives  are  produced,  and  the  record  of  the  act  of  judi- 
cial dehvery  of  possession  is  also  exhibited,  showing  that  Higuera 
was  personally  put  into  possession  of  his  land,  and  the  boundaries 
were  definitely  established  by  proper  authority.  It  is  also  shown 
that  the  conditions  of  the  grant  were  fully  complied  with  by  Higu- 
era, who  appears  to  have  enjoyed  the  uninterrupted  possession  of 
the  grant,  except  those  portions  which  he  may  have  sold,  until  his 
death. 

There  appears  then  to  be  no  doubt  of  the  validity  of  the  origi- 
nal grant  as  against  the  United  States,  nor  do  I  understand  it  to 
be  disputed  on  their  behalf.  This  fact  having  been  ascertained,  it 
would  seem  that  the  chief  duty  of  this  Court  is  performed,  and 
that  the  claim  should  be  confirmed.  It  is  however  opposed  nomi- 
nally on  behalf  of  the  United  States,  but  really  in  behalf  of  parties 
claiming  under  Higuera  and  affirming  the  validity  of  the  original 
grant,  but  denying  the  rights  of  the  present  claimant,  Martin,  to 
the  portion  of  the  land  alleged  to  have  been  conveyed  to  him.  The 
real  controversy  is,  therefore,  between  the  claimant  and  third  per- 
sons, and  this  Court  is  asked  in  effect  to  decide  between  parties 
whose  interests,  by  the  very  terms  of  the  Act,  its  decree  cannot 
affect. 

If  under  cover  of  proceedings  instituted  to  ascertain  the  rights  of 
the  United  States  to  the  lands  claimed  under  grants  of  the  former 
Government,  all  persons  claiming  adverse  interests  could  come  into 
the  controversy  and  obtain  an  adjudication  upon  their  conflicting 
titles,  it  needs  no  argument  to  show  that  this  class  of  cases  would 
soon  assume  so  complicated  and  embarrassing  a  form  as  to  indefi- 
nitely protract  their  final  determination.     In  the  mass  of  adverse 


148  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Martin  v.  United  States. 

claims  which  might  be  presented  for  the  same  land,  and  in  the  in- 
numerable questions  which  might  arise  of  fraud,  accident  or  priority, 
or  of  heirship,  devise,  partition,  succession,  purchase,  etc.,  under 
the  Spanish  or  American  laws,  the  great  object  for  which  the  pro- 
ceedings were  instituted  and  the  jurisdiction  conferred  upon  the 
Board  and  on  this  Court  would  in  many  cases  be  wholly  lost  sight 
of,  and  the  time  and  labor  of  the  Court  would  be  devoted  to  trying 
a  complicated  series  of  cross  ejectments  in  a  suit  not  dissimilar  to  a 
proceeding  in  rem.  But  if  this  Court  were  to  undertake  to  adjudi- 
cate upon  the  rights  of  adverse  claimants  as  between  themselves, 
the  very  nature  of  the  proceeding  would  require  it  to  permit  all 
such  claimants  to  intervene  in  every  suit.  The  impracticabihty  of 
allowing  this  right  was  demonstrated  in  the  opinion  delivered  by 
Mr.  Commissioner  Thornton  in  case  No.  2  before  the  Board,  and 
for  the  reasons  there  assigned  this  Court  has  heretofore  decided 
that  after  ascertaining  the  validity  of  the  original  grant  as  against 
the  United  States,  it  would  not  attempt  to  adjudicate  upon  the 
rights  of  various  claimants  under  the  original  grantee,  but  would 
decree  in  favor  of  the  party  presenting  the  application,  provided 
he  showed  aj»j>W??2(2/aag  right  to  the  confirmation  of  his  claim.  In 
this  way  alone  could  the  inquiries  before  this  Court  be  limited  to 
the  questions  the  Act  intended  it  should  decide,  while  all  questions 
of  mere  private  right  would  be  settled  before  the  ordinary  judicial 
tribunals  of  the  country  to  which  all  parties  have  access. 

The  only  question  then  to  be  determined  in  this  case  is :  Do  the 
mesne  "conveyances  to  the  claimant  show  such  di  prima  facie  right 
in  him  as  entitles  him  to  a  decree  in  his  favor,  or  are  they  so  clearly 
void  as  to  make  it  incumbent  to  reject  his  claim,  although  we  are 
satisfied  that  the  land  in  no  event  can  be  the  property  of  the 
United  States  ? 

The  claim  w^as  rejected  by  the  Board  on  the  ground  that  the  de- 
scription of  the  land  in  the  mesne  conveyances  by  Higuera  to  Fallon 
and  wife,  and  by  the  latter  to  the  claimant,  was  vague  and  uncer- 
tain, and  that  therefore  nothing  passed  by  the  deeds. 

The  description  is  as  follows  :  "  A  certain  quantity  of  land  lying, 
being  and  situated  in  the  district  and  territory  already  named  in 
the  valley  of  Napa,  containing  more  or  less  one  mile  square  of  land 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  149 

Martin  v.  Uuitcd   States. 

in  the  place  known  as  the  Rincon  de  las  Cameras,  commencing  on 
the  wagon  road  and  ending  at  the  point  of  the  hill  on  the  east." 

Much  additional  testimony  has  been  taken  in  this  Court.  Had 
that  testimony  been  before  the  Board,  it  is  not  certain  that  their 
decision  might  not  have  been  different. 

It  is,  I  think,  sufficiently  established  by  the  proofs,  that  the  Rin- 
con de  las  Cameras  is  a  triangular  piece  of  land  embraced  between 
Napa  river  on  one  side  and  the  arroyo  de  las  Cameras  on  the 
other.  These  tw^o  streams  come  together  at  an  acute  angle  at  the 
south,  forming  the  apex  and  two  sides  of  a  triangle.  The  limits  of 
the  Rincon  on  the  north  seem  not  very  definite,  but  the  boundaries 
of  the  land  in  that  direction  are  indicated  in  the  conveyance  with 
tolerable  distinctness.  A  line  drawn  from  the  wagon  road  to  the 
point  of  the  hills  on  the  east  would  nearly  form  the  base  of  the  tri- 
angle above  described,  and  I  think  sufficiently  shows  the  intended 
limits  of  the  grant  in  that  direction.  If  then  the  grant  had  been 
of  the  Rincon,  commencing  at  the  line  above  stated,  I  do  not  per- 
ceive that  any  doubt  could  exist  as  to  the  precise  tract  intended  to 
be  conveyed.  But  the  words  of  the  grant  are  "  a  quantity  of  land 
containing  more  or  less  one  mile  square  in  the  place  known  as  the 
Rincon  de  las  Cameras,  commencing,"  etc.  Was  this  then  a 
grant  of  one  mile  square  out  of  the  larger  quantity  contained  in 
the  Rincon,  or  did  the  grantor  intend  to  convey  the  Rincon  from 
the  line  mentioned,  adding  a  rough  estimate  of  its  supposed  extent  ? 
I  incline  to  the  latter  view.  If  the  parol  testimony  taken  be  deemed 
admissible,  there  cannot,  I  think,  remain  any  doubt  on  the  point, 
and  the  equitable  right  of  the  claimant  as  against  his  grantor  and 
his  heirs  to  have  the  land  according  to  the  limits  originally  in- 
tended, would  seem  indisputable. 

The  looseness  and  inaccuracy  of  the  estimates  of  the  area  of 
land  formed  by  the  Mexican  population  of  the  country  is  notorious, 
and  there  is  nothing  improbable  in  the  supposition  that  a  piece  of 
land  containing  in  fact  eighteen  hundred  acres  should  be  described 
as  containing  a  "  square  mile  more  or  less."  If  the  intention  had 
been  to  restrict  the  grantee  to  the  precise  quantity  of  one  mile  on 
the  line  mentioned,  the  words  ''  more  or  less  "  would  hardly  have 
been  introduced.     The  fact  that  they  are  in  the  deed  shows  that 


150  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Paclieco. 

the  grant  was  not  intended  to  be  of  any  specific  quantity  of  land, 
but  of  some  tract  present  to  the  mind  and  before  the  eyes  of  the 
parties.  That  tract  or  piece  of  land  must  have  been  the  Rincon, 
limited  on  the  north  by  the  line  mentioned  in  the  grant. 

It  is  unnecessary,  however,  to  discuss  the  question  further,  for 
no  decision  of  the  Court  on  this  point  can  ultimately  bind  the  par- 
ties who  alone  are  the  contestants.  I  think  it  clearly  our  duty  to 
confirm  the  claim  as  against  the  United  States  to  the  whole  Rincon, 
south  of  the  line  mentioned,  without  prejudice  however  to  the  rights 
of  any  third  parties  having  or  pretending  to  have  any  adverse  title 
to  the  same  land  or  to  any  part  of  it. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  ROSA  PACHECO 

et  al.,  CLAIMING  THE  Rancho  Arroyo  de  las  Nueces  y  Bol- 

BONES. 

This  claim  is  valid  for  all  the  land  within  the  boundaries  shown  by  the  diseuo,  and 
is  not  to  be  restricted  to  the  quantity  named  in  the  grant. 

Claim  for  two  leagues  of  land,  more  or  less,  in  Contra  Costa 
county,  confirmed  by  the  Board  for  two  leagues,  and  appealed  by 
the  United  States  and  by  claimants. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  United  States. 

A.  P.  Crittenden,  for  Claimants. 

In  this  case  appeals  have  been  taken  both  by  the  United  States 
and  by  the  claimants.  The  Board  confirmed  the  title  to  the  land 
to  the  extent  of  two  leagues  ;  and  the  claimants  assert  that  they 
are  entitled  to  a  confirmation  of  the  tract  granted  by  metes  and 
bounds,  and  irrespective  of  quantity. 

With  regard  to  the  validity  of  the  grant  no  question  seems  to  be 
raised.  In  the  brief  filed  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  it  is 
observed,  that  "  on  the  general  question  of  the  validity  of  the  whole 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  *  151 


United  States  v.  Paclieco. 


grant,  it  is  not  designed  to  repeat  objections  and  arguments  which 
this  Court  has  so  often  decided  to  be  untenable." 

The  vaUdity  of  the  title  being  thus  admitted,  under  the  prin- 
ciples laid  down  in  former  adjudications  of  this  Court,  the  only 
question  is  as  to  the  extent  to  which  it  should  be  confirmed. 

The  petition  was  presented  to  Governor  Figueroa  on  the  fifteenth 
of  May,  1834,  and  the  usual  order  of  reference  for  information  was 
made.  After  receiving  the  report  of  the  Ayuntamiento  of  San 
Jose  Guadalupe,  a  further  reference  was  made  to  the  Alcalde  of 
Monterey,  directing  him  to  examine  witnesses,  to  be  produced  by 
"the  petitioner,  as  to  her  qualifications,  as  to  whether  the  land  was 
vacant,  as  to  its  extent  and  nature,  and  as  to  whether  she  had  the 
means  of  stocking  it  with  cattle. 

The  Alcalde  accordingly  took  the  depositions  of  the  witnesses,  by 
which  it  appeared  that,  as  stated  by  two  of  them,  the  land  was  two 
and  one-half  leagues, "  a  little  more  or  less,"  long,  and  about  two 
leagues  broad  ;  and  as  deposed  by  the  third,  that  it  was  two  leagues 
long,  more  or  less,  and  about  two  leagues  broad.  Upon  receiving 
these  reports,  the  Governor  made  the  usual  order  of  concession, 
declaring  the  petitioner  ''  owner  of  the  land  between  the  Arroyo 
de  las  Nueces  and  the  Sierra  de  los  Golgones,  bounded  by  the  said 
places  and  by  the  ranchos  of  San  Ramon,  Las  Juntas  and  Monte 
del  Diablo ;  and  directing  the  expediente  to  be  sent  to  the  Most 
Excellent  Deputation  for  their  due  approval.  The  grant  or  final 
title,  in  what  would  seem  to  be  strict  comphance  with  the  Col- 
onization Laws,  was  withheld  until  the  approval  of  the  Assembly 
had  made  the  grant  definitively  vahd. 

On  the  eleventh  of  July,  1834,  the  Assembly  passed  a  resolution 
approving  "  the  grant  made  to  Dona  Juana  Sanches  de  Pacheco 
of  the  place  included  between  the  Arroyo  de  las  Nueces  and  the 
Bolbones." 

On  the  thirty-first  of  July,  the  Governor,  after  referring  to  the 
resolution  of  approval,  ordered  the  title  to  issue.  It  accordingly 
issued  on  the  same  day. 

The  grant,  after  reciting  that  Doua  J.  S.  de  Pacheco  had  peti- 
tioned for  the  land  included  between  the  Arroyo  de  las  Nueces  and 
the  Sierra  de  los  Golgones,  bounded  by  the  said  places  and  the 


152  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT 


United  States  v.  Pacheco. 


ranches  of  Las  Juntas,  San  Ramon  and  Monte  del  Diablo,  and 
after  referring  to  the  resolution  approving  the  grant  of  the 
land  between  the  Arroyo  de  las  Nueces  and  the  Sierra  de  los  Golgo- 
nes,  grants  to  her  "  the  aforesaid  land,  declaring  to  her  the  owner- 
ship of  it  bj  these  presents,  and  subject  to  the  following  con- 
ditions." 

The  fourth  condition  is  as  follows  : 

"  The  land  of  which  mention  is  made  is  two  square  leagues,  a 
little  more  or  less,  as  shown  by  the  map  which  goes  with  the  ex- 
pediente.  The  magistrate  who  may  give  the  possession  will  cause 
it  to  be  measured  in  conformity  with  the  ordinance,  for  the  purpose 
of  marking  out  the  boundaries,  leaving  the  surplus  which  may 
result  to  the  nation  for  its  convenient  uses." 

It  is  contended  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  that  by  this  con- 
dition the  quantity  of  land  is  limited  to  two  leagues,  a  little  more 
or  less. 

It  is  urged  on  the  part  of  the  claimants,  that  the  original  order 
of  concession,  the  resolution  of  approval,  and  the  description  of  the 
land  in  the  grant  itself,  clearly  show  the  intention  to  have  been  to 
grant  the  land  as  delineated  on  the  diseno  and  described  in  the 
grant ;  and  tl\at  if  the  fourth  condition  be  construed  to  limit  the 
quantity,  it  is  repugnant  to  the  rest  of  the  grant,  inconsistent  with 
the  previous  concession  and  resolution  of  approval,  and  probably 
introduced  by  mistake. 

If  such  was  the  intention  of  the  Governor  when  he  made  the  con- 
cession, and  of  the  Assembly  when  they  approved  of  it,  the  final 
title,  issued  with  an  express  reference  to,  and  avowed  conformity 
with  the  resolution  of  approval,  should,  if  possible,  be  so  construed 
as  to  give  effect  to  it.  The  inquiry  therefore  is,  did  the  Governor 
intend  by  the  fourth  condition  to  limit  the  quantity  of  land  granted, 
or  is  the  mention  of  quantity  to  be  treated  as  merely  a  misdescrip- 
tion of  the  extent  of  the  land,  which  should,  as  at  common  law, 
yield  to  boundaries,  when  the  latter  are  distinctly  mentioned,  and 
when  such  construction  is  necessary  to  give  effect  to  the  intention 
of  the  parties  ? 

In  the  case  of  the  United  States  v.  Wright^  it  was  held  by  this 
Court,  that  where  land  had  been  granted  by  specific  boundaries, 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  .  153 

United  States  v.  Paclieco. 

which  inchTded  in  fact  about  eight  leagues,  and  the  condition  speci- 
fied the  extent  as  four  leagues,  a  little  more  or  less,  the  grant  could 
not  be  construed  to  embrace  the  larger  quantity.  But  in  that  case 
it  appeared  that  the  petitioner  himself,  as  well  as  the  witnesses  pro- 
duced by  him,  had  represented  the  land  as  only  "  three  or  four 
leagues  in  extent.''  The  Governor,  therefore,  in  Hmiting  the  grant 
to  the  quantity  represented  to  be  included  within  the  boundaries, 
either  merely  carried  into  effect  the  understanding  and  intentions 
of  all  parties,  or  else  the  representations  were  fraudulent,  and  the 
parties  to  the  deception  could  not  in  a  Court  of  equity  be  allowed 
the  fruits  of  their  fraud. 

It  seemed  to  the  Court  in  that  case  that  justice  would  be  satis- 
fied and  every  substantial  right  protected  by  limiting  the  extent  of 
the  land  to  the  quantity  which  the  Governor  intended  to  grant  and 
the  petition  asked  for. 

But  the  case  at  bar  is  different.  The  Governor  was  fully  ap- 
prised of  the  extent  of  the  land,  not  only  by  the  testimony  of  the 
witnesses  produced  before  the  Alcalde,  but  the  diseiio  which  was 
submitted  both  to  the  Governor  and  the  Assembly,  and  which  is 
referred  to  in  the  condition,  shows  the  land  included  within  the 
boundaries  to  be  of  about  the  extent  mentioned  by  the  witnesses. 
The  boundaries  mentioned  in  the  concession,  the  resolution  of  ap- 
proval, and  the  grant,  are  the  same  as  those  indicated  on  the  map, 
and  the  Governor  in  all  probability  derived  his  description  of  the 
land  from  that  source.  .  It  is  clear  from  this  fact,  as  well  as  the 
express  language  of  the  condition,  that  the  Governor  intended  to 
grant  the  land  "  as  shown  by  the  map  ;  "  and  that  map  contains  a 
scale  which  must,  independently  of  other  information,  have  apprised 
the  Governor  that  the  quantity  was  greater  than  two  leagues. 

In  this,  as  in  ail  analogous  cases,  the  only  object  of  the  Court 
should  be  to  carry  out  the  intentions  of  the  granting  power.  When, 
therefore,  we  find  the  land  granted  by  specific  boundaries,  and  those 
boundaries  represented  to  the  grantor  to  contain  a  certain  quantity  ; 
when  the  grantor's  attention  has  been  directed  to  the  point ;  and 
on  ascertaining  that  the  quantity  is  the  same  as  that  represented 
he  nevertheless  proceeds  to  grant  all  the  land  within  those  bound- 
aries, and  refers  to  the  map  which  clearly  indicates  the  quantity — 


154  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Murpliy. 

under  all  these  circumstances,  we  must  consider  that  the  intention 
was  to  grant  all  the  land  included  within  the  boundaries,  notwith- 
standing that  in  a  subsequent  condition  the  quantity  may  be  errone- 
ously stated. 

That  conditions  applicable  only  to  one  species  of  grants  wxre 
often  inserted  by  mistake  in  grants  of  a  different  species  is  notori- 
ous. In  this  case  the  mention  of  two  leagues  as  the  extent  of.  the 
granted  land  is  perhaps  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  clerk  who  drafted 
the  document  forgot  that  a  tract  two  leagues  broad  by  two  wide 
contained  four  and  not  two  square  leagues. 

However  this  may  be,  we  think  it  clear  that  in  this  case  all  the 
land  within  the  boundaries  was  intended  to  be  granted  ;  and  as 
there  is  no  proof  or  suggestion  that  the  land  so  included  exceeds 
in  extent  the  quantity  testified  to  by  the  witnesses  before  the 
Alcalde,  that  the  claim  should  be  confined  to  the  tract  as  described 
in  the  grant  and  delineated  on  the  map. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  JAMES  MURPHY, 

CLAIMING  THE  RaNCHO  CaSADORES. 

The  validity  of  claims  uuder  the  Sutter  General  Title  affirmed  in  Hensley's  case, 
No.  33. 

Claim  for  four  leagues  of  land  in  Sacramento  county,  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Thornton  &  Williams,  for  Appellee. 

The  claim  of  the  appellee  in  this  case  is  founded  on  the  general 
title  issued  by  Micheltorena  in  1844,  the  validity  of  which  has  al- 
ready been  affirmed  by  this  Court  in  the  case  of  United  States  v. 
jS.  J.  Hensley,  No.  33.  The  testimony  of  Gen.  Sutter  shows  the 
orio'inal  grantee,  Ernest  Rufus,  to  have  been  one  of  those  in  whose 
favor  the  general  title  issued.     It  also  appears  that  the  condition  of 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  155 

United  States  v.  Ghana. 

occupation  and  cultivation  were  fully  complied  with,  and  the  diseilo 
which  accompanies  the  petition  indicates  the  tract  granted  with 
clearness  and  precision. 

The  claim  was  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  the  case  has  been 
submitted  without  argument  or  objection  on  the  part  of  the  United 
States. 

The  decision  of  the  Board  must  therefore  be  affirmed,  and  a  de- 
cree of  confirmation  entered. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  CLAUDE  GHANA, 

CLAIMING  THE  RaNCHO  NeMSHAS. 

The  validity  of  claims  under  the  Sutter  General  Title  affirmed  in  Hcnsley's  case, 
No.  33. 

Claim  for  four  leagues  of  land  in  Yuba  county,  confirmed  by  the 
Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Thornton  &  Williams,  for  Appellee. 

The  claim  in  this  case  rests  upon  what  is  known  as  the  "  general 
title  "  of  Governor  Micheltorena.  The  validity  of  that  title  has 
already  been  affirmed  by  this  Court  in  the  case  of  the  United  States 
V.  S.  J.  Henslet/,  No.  33,  and  the  only  inquiries  that  arise  are 
whether  the  person  from  whom  the  claimant  derives  title  was  one 
of  those  for  whose  benefit  the  title  issued — whether  he  has  per- 
formed the  conditions,  and  whether  the  land  intended  to  be  granted 
is  sufficiently  indicated.  On  the  first  point  the  evidence  leaves  no 
room  for  doubt.  The  documents  contained  in  the  expediente  and 
the  evidence  on  file  clearly  show  that  Pedro  Teodoro  Sicard  was 
one  of  those  who  petitioned  the  Governor,  on  whose  applications 
Gen.  Sutter  had  reported  favorably,  and  for  whose  benefit  the  gen- 
eral title  issued  and  was  dehvered  to  the  latter.  The  copy  of  the 
general  title  which  Gen.  Sutter  delivered  to  each  petitioner  in 
11 


156  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Stevenson. 

whose  favor  it  had  issued  is  produced,  with  the  certificate  of  Sutter 
showing  it  to  be  a  copy  of  the  original. 

The  Board  does  not  seem  to  have  entertained  anv  doubt  as  to  the 
fact  that  Sicard  was  intended  to  be  one  of  the  grantees  under  the 
general  title.  The  evidence  also  shows  that  the  conditions  of  occu- 
pation and  cultivation  were  fully  comphed  with,  and  the  situation 
and  boundaries  of  the  land  are  indicated  with  great  precision  in  the 
petition  and  diseno  which  accompanies  it. 

The  claim  was  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  the  case  has  been 
submitted  without  argument  or  objection  on  the  part  of  the  United 
States  to  its  vahdity. 

We  are  of  opinion  that  a  decree  affirming  the  decision  of  the 
Board  should  be  entered. 


THE   UNITED   STATES,  Appellants,  v%.  JONATHAN  D, 

STEVENSON  et  al.^  claiming  the  Rancho  Medanos. 

No  objections  made  to  tlie  confirmation  of  this  claim. 

Claim  for  two  leagues  of  land  in  Contra  Costa  county,  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  AppelLants. 

Volney  E.  Howard,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  is  for  a  piece  of  land  called  "  Medanos," 
embracing  two  square  leagues  "  a  little  more  or  less."  It  was  con- 
firmed by  the  Board,  and  the  cause  has  been  submitted  to  this  Court 
on  appeal,  without  argument,  or  the  statement  of  any  objection  to 
its  validity. 

The  title  paper  is  produced  by  the  claimants  and  its  genuineness 
duly  certified.  The  expediente  from  the  archives  not  only  shows 
that  the  preliminary  proceedings  were  in  due  form,  but  that  the 
grant  was  confirmed  by  the  Departmental  Assembly  about  six 
months  after  its  date.     It  is  also  shown  that  the  conditions  were 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  157 

Garcia  v.  United  States. 

fully  complied  with.  The  delineation  on  the  diseilo  appears  to  be 
rude  and  inexact,  but  the  title  itself  describes  the  boundaries  of 
the  tract  with  some  precision.  In  that  document  the  land  is  men- 
tioned as  that  known  by  the  name  of  "  Medanos,"  and  bounded  on 
the  south  by  the  land  of  citizen  Noriega,  on  the  north  by  that  of 
citizen  Salvio  Pacheco,  on  the  east  by  the  river  San  Joaquin,  and 
on  the  west  by  the  "  lomarias  "  or  small  hills.  The  third  condition 
states  the  extent  of  the  granted  land  to  be  two  square  leagues,  a 
"  little  more  or  less."  Some  of  the  witnesses  appear  to  have  sup- 
posed that  the  land  embraced  within  these  boundaries  would  include 
a  tract  of  far  greater  extent  than  that  mentioned  in  the  condition. 
But  it  is  clear  that  they  have  confounded  the  lomarias  mentioned 
in  the  grant  with  the  range  of  mountains  known  as  the  Contra 
Costa  hills,  which  he  at  a  considerable  distance,  and  which  would, 
if  taken  as  the  western  boundary,  not  only  include  a  tract  of  country 
of  great  extent,  but  also  one  or  more  intervening  ranches. 

It  would  seem,  however,  that  the  "  lomarias  "  spoken  of  are  a 
range  of  low^  hills,  and  that  the  land  included  within  these  and  the 
other  boundaries  of  the  grant  has  about  the  extent  mentioned  in 
the  grant. 

Such  appears  to  have  been  the  view  taken  of  the  case  by  the 
Board,  and  we  see  no  reason  for  a  different  conclusion. 

The  mesne  conveyances  appear  to  be  regular.  Under  the  proofs 
offered,  the  claimant,  Stevenson,  is  entitled  to  a  confirmation  of  the 
part  conveyed  to  him  by  the  deed  as  reformed  according  to  the  in- 
tentions of  the  parties  under  the  decree  of  the  District  Court  of 
this  State. 

A  decree  affirming  the  decision  of  the  Board  must  be  entered.. 


RAFAEL  GARCIA,  claiming  nine  leagues  of  land  in  Men- 
docino County,  Appellant,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

A  MERE  permission  to  search  for  and  take  possession  of  land  did  not  bind  the 
Mexican  Government  to  make  a  title :  consequently,  the  United  States  are  not 
required  under  the  treaty  to  recognise  this  claim. 


158  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


Garcia  v.  United  States. 


This  claim  was  rejected  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the 
claimant. 

E.  L.  GooLD,  for  Appellant. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

In  support  of  his  claim  the  appellant  exhibits  an  order  of  Mich- 
eltorena,  dated  Nov.  15th,  1844,  which  is  as  follows : 

"  According  to  your  memorial  of  the  fourteenth  instant,  you  ask 
for  the  grant  of  a  passport  to  penetrate  into  the  points  of  the  coast 
on  the  northern  line  of  this  country,  with  the  object  of  locating  a 
tract  of  land  of  the  extent  of  eight  to  nine  leagues,  since  that 
which  you  now  occupy,  with  your  personal  property,  is  so  limited. 
By  this  order  you  are  empowered  to  appear  before  the  military 
commanding  authority  of  that  frontier,  in  order  that  after  an  exam- 
ination you  may  proceed  to  your  research  after  the  tract  of  land 
you  ask  for  as  a  recompense  for  the  services  rendered  by  you  to 
the  nation.  If  you  should  happen  to  select  any  tract  of  land,  you 
are  empowered  to  occupy  it  with  your  said  property,  and  to  take 
possession  of  it  while  the  usual  procedure  is  being  prosecuted,  pre- 
senting the  requisite  sketch.     God  and  Liberty. 

"  Manuel  Micheltorena. 

"  Monterey,  Nov.  15th,  1844. 

"  To  Don  Rafael  Garcia,  at  his  Rancho." 

Availing  himself  of  the  permission  thus  granted,  the  claimant 
appears  to  have  selected  a  tract  of  land,  and  to  have  occupied  and 
improved  it  to  some  extent.  No  steps,  however,  were  taken  by 
him  to  obtain  a  title  until  March  4th,  1846,  when  Garcia  addressed 
a  petition  to  Gov.  Pico,  in  which,  after  referring  to  the  order  of 
Micheltorena,  he  solicits  a  grant  of  the  land.  Gov.  Pio  Pico,  by  a 
marginal  order  dated  April  7th,  1845,  referred  the  petition  to  the 
Alcalde  of  San  Rafael  for  the  usual  informe.  On  the  twenty- 
ninth  of  April,  1846,  the  Alcalde  reported  that  the  land  did  not 
belong  to  any  private  individual. 

The  foregoing  constitutes  all  the  evidence  of  title  produced  by 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  159 

Garcia  v.  United  States. 

the  claimant.  It  is  not  pretended  that  any  grant  Avas  ever  issued 
for  the  land,  or  that  any  further  action  whatever  was  taken  by  Pio 
Pico  on  receiving  the  Alcalde's  informe.  Whether  he  determined 
not  to  grant  the  land,  or  whether  he  omitted  to  do  so  in  consequence 
of  the  distracted  condition  of  public  affairs,  we  are  ignorant ;  one 
fact  is  clear — no  grant  was  obtained  by  the  claimant. 

It  is  contended  that  the  permission  given  by  Micheltorena  to 
search  for  a  suitable  tract,  and  to  occupy  it,  if  found,  ''  tvhile  the 
usual  procedure  is  being  i^rosecuted^^^  gave  to  the  claimant  an  equity 
which,  when  coupled  with  subsequent  occupation,  this  Court  is 
bound  to  respect.  But  the  permission  in  this  case  is  widely  differ- 
ent from  the  concessions  or  warrants  of  survey  which  in  the  Louisi- 
ana and  Florida  cases  were  held  to  constitute  inchoate  or  equitable 
titles. 

A  brief  reference  to  the  mode  of  granting  public  lands  in  Louisi- 
ana and  Florida,  as  compared  with  that  estabhshed  by  the  coloniza- 
tion laws,  will  show  that  the  decisions  applicable  to  inchoate  titles 
under  the  former  system  can  have  no  application  to  the  present  case. 

In  Louisiana  and  Florida,  the  granting  officer,  on  receipt  of  the 
petition,  issued  a  concession  to  the  party,  authorizing  him  to  have 
his  land  surveyed  by  the  official  surveyor.  If  the  surveyor  found 
the  land  to  be  vacant,  and  that  it  would  not  interfere  with  the  rights 
of  others,  he  returned  a  plat  or  figurative  plan,  and  the  party  there- 
upon obtained  an  absolute  grant.  The  preliminary  concession  was, 
as  its  name  imports,  a  grant,  and  usually  conceded,  as  in  GlerCs 
case  (13  How.  258)  the  land  to  the  petititioner  and  his  heirs.  To 
these  concessions  conditions  were  commonly  annexed,  that  a  mill 
should  be  erected  within  a  specified  time,  that  the  land  should  be 
cultivated,  that  the  party  should  levee  and  ditch  the  river  front  in 
Lower  Louisiana,  etc.  Where,  then,  a  party  had  obtained  a  conces- 
sion, but  had  omitted  to  procure  the  subsequent  absolute  title  on 
the  completion  of  the  survey,  the  title  acquired  by  the  concession 
was  held  to  be  inchoate  and  imperfect,  and  the  real  equity  of  the 
claimant  Avas  deemed  to  consist  in  the  performance  of  the  conditions 
or  contract  specified  in  the  concession.  The  implied  promise  or 
assurance  contained  in  the  concession,  that  the  title  should  issue 
provided  the  party  performed  the  conditions,  was  deemed  obligatory 


160  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Garcia  v.  United  States. 

on  the  conscience  of  this,  as  well  as  the  former  Government,  and 
the  claims  in  such  cases  were  confirmed. 

Under  the  Mexican  system  no  preliminary  concession  or  warrant 
of  survey  issued  to  the  party.  The  final  and  absolute  title  was,  by 
the  regulations  of  1828,  the  first  and  only  document  which  the 
petitioner  received,  and  conditions  subsequent  were  introduced  into 
the  final  grant,  by  which,  on  their  nonperformance,  the  estate  of 
the  grantee  could  be  divested. 

A  mere  petition  to  search  for  land,  such  as  that  given  to  the  pres- 
ent claimant,  finds  no  place  in  the  Mexican  system ;  nor  can  a 
naked  authority  to  take  possession  be  likened  to  those  preliminary 
concessions,  under  and  on  the  faith  of  which  the  land  was  sur- 
veyed and  the  conditions  fulfilled  in  Louisiana  and  Florida. 

The  application  of  Garcia  to  Micheltorena  was  for  a  passport  to 
enable  him  to  search  for  land.  In  granting  this,  and  also  the  per- 
mission to  put  his  cattle  upon  the  tract  he  might  select,  Michelto- 
rena in  no  respect  bound  himself  or  his  successors  to  issue  a  final 
title.  Such  seems  to  have  been  the  view  of  Pio  Pico  and  the 
claimant  himself,  for  a  petition,  accompanied  by  the  usual  diseno, 
is  formally  presented  to  that  oflQcer  and  by  him  referred  for  infor- 
mation as  in  other  cases. 

Had  the  order  of  Micheltorena  contained  any  words  which  might 
be  construed  to  import  a  present  grant,  the  case  might  be  different. 
But  none  such  are  to  be  found.  If  this  claim  is  to  be  confirmed, 
every  provisional  license  or  permission  temporarily  to  occupy  land 
must  be  held  to  constitute  an  equitable  title,  provided  the  claimant 
has  availed  himself  of  the  permission — a  ruling  which  would  astonish 
no  one  more  than  the  old  inhabitants  of  the  country,  by  whom  the 
importance  of  obtaining  a  ''  title  "  from  the  Governor  was  well  un- 
derstood. 

For  aught  we  know,  Pio  Pico,  when  the  petition  was  subsequently 
presented,  found  it  inexpedient  to  grant  the  land  ;  and  if  the  claim- 
ant, under  a  mere  permission  to  occupy  it  with  his  cattle,  has  built 
a  house  upon  it,  and  for  two  years  omitted  any  effort  to  procure  a 
title,  he  must  attribute  the  loss  of  the  land  to  his  own  neglect. 

Such  was  the  view  taken  of  this  claim  by  the  Board,  by  whom  it 
was  unanimously  rejected,  and  in  that  decision  I  concur. 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  •  161 

United  States  v.  Rico. 

THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  FRANCISCO  RICO 
et  aL,  CLAIMING  THE  Ranciio  del  Rio  Estanislao. 

This  claim,  tlioxigh  subject  to  suspicion  as  to  the  bona  Jides  of  tlie  grant,  must  be 
confirmed  on  the  testimony  presented. 

Claim  for  eleven  leagues  of  land  in  Stanislaus  countj,  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 
Jeremiah  Clarke,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  was  confirmed  by  the  Board  of  Commis- 
sioners. 

We  have  examined  the  testimony  contained  in  the  transcript,  and, 
tlough  there  is  room  for  doubt  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the  grant, 
we  have  found  nothing  to  justify  us  in  reversing  the  decision  on  the 
ground  that  it  is  a  forgery.  It  is  true  that  a  fatality  not  usual 
seems  to  have  attended  this  grant,  for  not  only  do  the  signatures 
of  Jimeno  and  Micheltorena  present  a  somewhat  suspicious  appear- 
ance, but  the  expediente,  which  might  have  confirmed  or  dispelled 
doubts  as  to  the  authenticity  of  the  grant,  has  been  lost  while  in 
the  custody  of  an  officer  to  whom  such  documents  were  not  or- 
dinarily entrusted.  But  whatever  doubts  may  be  suggested  by 
these  and  other  circumstances,  we  are  met  by  the  positive  testimony 
of  witnesses  who  saw  the  grant  executed,  as  they  swear,  and  one  of 
whom  actually  drew  it  up.  The  Board  who  heard  the  witnesses 
testify,  and  who  had  other  means  of  judging  of  their  credibihty 
than  this  Court  possesses,  confirmed  the  claim ;  and  the  case  has 
been  submitted  to  this  Court  without  argument  or  observation  of 
any  kind  on  the  part  of  the  United  States.  No  additional  testi- 
mony has  been  taken  since  the  decision  of  the  Commissioners,  and 
we  are  left  to  comfirm  or  reverse  the  decision  of  the  Board,  with 
only  such  light  as  to  the  merits  of  the  case  as  is  afibrded  by  a  pe- 
rusal of  the  transcript. 

To  pronounce   this  grant  a  forgery,  we  should  entertain  some- 


162  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Noe  V.  United  States. 

thing  more  than  a  suspicion  as  to  its  genuineness  ;  and  as  the  Board, 
who  saw  the  witnesses  and  examined  the  original  grant,  confirmed 
the  claim,  we  do  not  feel  authorized  to  reverse  its  decision. 
A  decree  of  confirmation  must  therefore  be  entered. 


JAMES    NOE,  CLAIMING   THE   ISLAND  OP  THE    SaCRAMENTO,  AP- 
PELLANT, vs,  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

Entitled  to  confirmation  under  the  ruling  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Fremont's 
case. 

Claim  for  five  leagues  of  land  in  Yolo  county,  rejected  by  the 
Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimant. 

Calhoun  Benham,  for  Appellant. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

It  appears  by  the  title  papers  produced  in  this  case,  that  on  the 
tenth  of  May,  1841,  Robert  Elwell  presented  a  petition  to  Governor 
Alvarado  for  a  tract  of  land  on  the  Sacramento  river.  The  peti- 
tioner set  forth  that  for  sixteen  years  he  had  been  a  resident  of  the 
country,  and  had  a  numerous  family.  He  also  stated  that  the 
various  pohtical  changes  in  the  country  had  impaired  his  capital, 
part  of  which  had  been  furnished  to  the  different  Governors,  as 
his  excellency  was  aware.  The  petitioner  further  alludes  to  his 
services  in  the  militia,  for  which  he  never  received  any  pay,  owing 
to  the  scarcity  of  funds  in  the  national  exchequer.  He  therefore 
begs  that  his  excellency,  not  forgetting  the  duty  of  generously 
recompensing  the  services  of  faithful  subordinates,  and  also  "  the 
necessity  of  giving  an  impulse  to  the  progress  of  agriculture  in  the 
country,"  and  supported  as  he  was  by  the  colonization  laws  which 
so  fully  authorized  him  to  make  concessions  of  land,  might  grant 
him  the  tract  solicited. 

On  the  margin  of  this  petition  the  Governor  writes  :  "  In  con- 
sideration of  the  services  and  merits  herein  mentioned,  I  grant  him 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  163 

Noo  V.  United  States. 

(the  petitioner)  the  land  he  requests,  with  the  understanding  that 
he  shall  abide  by  the  reports  that  must  be  asked  for  as  to  whether 
the  land  has  been  granted  for  the  benefit  of  some  private  individual, 
pueblo  or  corporation,  with  all  the  rest  that  may  be  deemed  con- 
venient, so  soon  as  he  shall  accompany  the  plan  which  will  head 
the  formation  of  the  expediente." 

This  petition  and  marginal  decree  appear  to  have  remained  in 
the  possession  of  the  petitioner,  nor  were  any  further  steps  taken 
by  him  to  obtain  a  more  formal  title.  He  states,  however,  in  his 
deposition,  that  a  plan  was  furnished  to  the  Governor  such  as  was 
deemed  sufficient,  but  the  expediente  which  it  was  to  "  head  "  is 
not  produced  from  the  archives. 

No  efforts  of  any  kind  appear  to  have  been  made  by  the  peti- 
tioner to  settle  upon  or  occupy  his  land,  and  the  title  papers  seem 
to  have  remained  in  his  possession  until  1852,  when  he  sold  to  the 
present  claimant. 

In  explanation  of  his  failure  to  occupy  the  land,  the  grantee 
states  that  he  was  prevented  from  doing  so  at  the  time  of  the  grant 
by  the  danger  from  the  Indians,  and  afterwards  by  the  disturbances 
in  the  country. 

Jose  Castro,  a  native  Californian  of  some  distinction,  and  who  has 
held  the  offices  of  Governor,  Prefect  and  Commandant  General  of 
the  Territory,  deposes  that  from  1841  until  the  change  of  govern- 
ment the  whole  region  of  country  above  Sutter's  fort,  or  New  Hel- 
vetia, was  not  in  a  situation  to  be  settled  upon  by  individual  grantees, 
owing  to  the  hostihty  of  the  Indians.  The  Government  rarely  sent 
any  troops  to  maintain  settlements,  and  only  for  short  times  and 
few  in  number,  during  the  period  from  1841  to  the  change  of 
government. 

Nathan  Coombs,  whose  deposition  was  taken  in  this  Court,  and 
who  has  resided  in  the  country  since  1843,  testifies  that  from  that 
year,  when  he  first  knew  the  land,  the  Indians  in  the  neighborhood 
were  hostile  to  the  whites.  That  near  the  head  of  the  island  there 
was  a  rancheria,  and  the  Indians  were  very  numerous.  That  a 
company  from  Oregon,  of  which  he  was  a  member,  had  a  fight  with 
a  large  body  of  them,  from  five  hundred  to  one  thousand  strong,  and 
that  during  the  same  season  Captain  Sutter  with  a  party  of  men 
also  had  an  engagement  with  them. 


164  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Noe  V.  United  States. 

The  above  comprises  all  the  evidence  offered  in  excuse  or  ex- 
planation of  the  omission  of  the  grantee  to  fulfill  the  conditions  of 
his  grant. 

The  first  question  that  arises  under  this  state  of  facts  is,  did  the 
marginal  decree  of  the  Governor  convey  to  the  petitioner  "  a 
present  and  immediate  interest,  either  legal  or  equitable,  in  the 
land?'' 

The  form  of  the  grant  is  entirely  unusual.  The  marginal  decrees 
of  the  Governors  were  in  ordinary  cases  but  references  for  informa- 
tion, and  the  expedientes  usually  contain  the  petition,  the  di- 
seno,  the  marginal  order  of  reference,  the  reports  of  the  officers,  and 
the  order  or  decree  of  concession  by  the  Governor — the  latter  gen- 
erally commencing  with  the  words  "  Vista  la  peticion." 

The  documento  or  final  title  was  then  made  out  in  conformity 
with  the  order  of  concession.  In  this  were  expressed  the  conditions 
of  the  grant,  its  extent,  etc.,  and  it  was  delivered  to  the  party  in- 
terested as  his  title  deed.  A  copy,  however,  was  usually  attached 
to  the  other  documents  above  enumerated,  forming  the  expediente 
on  file  in  the  archives  ;  but  the  copy  was  frequently  not  signed,  it 
being  thought  sufficient  if  the  title  paper  delivered  to  the  party 
was  properly  authenticated.  The  title  paper  was  usually  signed 
by  the  Governor  and  Secretary. 

The  expediente,  when  thus  completed,  was  transmitted  to  the 
Assembly  for  their  action,  and  if  the  grant  was  approved,  a  certifi- 
cate of  the  fact  was  given  to  the  grantee. 

I  have  met  with  no  case  where  these  forms  were  not  substan- 
tially complied  with  when  grants  under  the  colonization  laws  were 
made.  In  the  case  at  bar,  the  onlj^  document  relied  on  as  a  grant 
is  the  order  or  decree  written  on  the  margin  of  the  petition.  Un- 
doubtedly the  Governor  uses  words  of  grant — "  I  grant  him  the 
land  which  he  requests  " — but  the  condition  or  quahfication  an- 
nexed, that  the  petitioner  should  abide  by  the  reports,  etc.,  clearly 
shows  that  the  Governor  did  not  intend  his  marginal  decree  to 
operate  as  a  definitive  concession  of  the  land. 

In  the  case  of  Arguello  vs.  The  United  States,  decided  at  the 
last  term  of  the  Supreme  Court,  the  Court,  in  speaking  of  the  order 
of  concession  in  that  case,  (which  was  the  decree  already  alluded 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  165 

Noe  V.  United  States. 

to,  beginning  with  the  words — "  Vista  la  peticion,"  and  which  was 
certainly  a  more  formal  decree  than  the  marginal  order  in  the 
present  case)  say :  "By  the  fourth  section,  the  Governor,  being 
thus  informed,  may  '  accede  or  not'  to  the  petition.  This  was  done 
in  two  ways ;  sometimes  he  expressed  his  consent  by  merely 
writing  the  word  concedido  at  the  bottom  of  the  expediente  ;  at  other 
times  with  more  formality.  *  *  It  is  intended  merely  to  show 
that  the  Governor  has  acceded  to  the  request  of  the  applicant,  and 
as  an  order  for  the  patent  or  definitive  title  to  be  drawn  out  for  ex- 
ecution. *  *  It  has  none  of  the  characteristics  of  a  definitive 
grant." 

But  the  marginal  decree  in  this  case  cannot  even  be  regarded  as 
an  order  for  the  definitive  grant  to  be  made  out.  For  the  Governor 
clearly  intimates  that  reports  are  to  be  received,  the  disefio  to  be 
furnished,  and  the  expediente  to  be  formed,  before  the  final  title 
issued.  The  marginal  order  must,  I  think,  be  taken  merely  as 
showing  that  the  Governor  has  acceded  to  the  petitioner's  request, 
and  agrees  to  grant  him  the  land  if  the  reports,  etc.,  should  be 
favorable.  But  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  information  required 
by  the  Governor  was  only  as  to  whether  the  land  was  the  property 
of  any  one  else,  and  the  absolute  terms  of  the  order  itself,  as  well 
as  the  language  of  the  qualification  added  to  it,  perhaps  justify  us 
in  considering  it  as  a  positive  promise  to  grant  the  land  to  the  pe- 
titioner in  consideration  of  his  just  claims  upon  the  Government, 
provided  it  should  turn  out  that  the  land  was  vacant. 

The  right  thus  acquired  by  the  petitioner  was  an  equitable  claim 
upon  the  Government  to  have  his  title  perfected,  and  had  he  gone 
on  to  occupy  and  improve  his  land,  and  had  he  been  found  at  the 
acquisition  of  the  country  in  the  possession  and  enjoyment  of  it,  the 
United  States  would  have  been  clearly  bound  to  respect  his  rights. 
But  so  far  as  the  evidence  discloses,  the  petitioner  never  went  upon 
the  land  during  the  existence  of  the  former  government. 

The  causes  of  his  omission  to  do  so,  as  shown  by  the  evidence, 
were  the  usual  ones  of  Indian  hostilities  and  political  disturbances. 
No  testimony  has  been  taken  to  show  that  the  obstacles  to  a  settle- 
ment might  have  been  overcome  ;  nor  has  it  been  made  to  appear 
to  the  Court,  on  behalf  of  the  United  States,  that  any  one  demanded 


166  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

No6  V.  United  States, 

the  land.  Compelled  as  we  are  to  be  governed  by  the  evidence  in 
each  particular,  we  must  accept  facts  as  true  which  are  established 
by  the  uncontradicted  testimony  of  unimpeached  witnesses.  It 
would  seem  clear  then,  from  the  testimony,  that  from  the  time  of 
the  grant  until  the  American  occupation,  the  settlement  of  the 
land  was  impracticable.  The  omission  to  occupy  cannot,  therefore, 
raise  any  presumption  of  a  voluntary  abandonment  by  the  grantee. 

That  such  a  delay  would  not  probably  have  forfeited  the  land 
under  the  Mexican  laws  and  usages,  unless  some  other  person  was 
ready  to  appropriate  the  lands  and  thus  carry  out  the  policy  of  the 
Government,  was  intimated  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of 
Fremont.  More  especially  would  the  grantee  be  entitled  to  in- 
dulgence where  the  grant  was  "  not  made  merely  to  carry  out  the 
colonization  laws,  but  in  consideration  of  previous  public  services." 

The  circumstance  which  suggests  most  strongly  the  idea  that  the 
grantee  did  in  truth  abandon  all  thought  of  profiting  by  his  grant, 
is  his  omission  to  make  further  appUcation  for  the  usual  and  formal 
title.  I  have  endeavored  correctly  to  estimate  the  force  which 
should  be  given  to  this  consideration.  It  has  seemed  to  me  that  it 
would  perhaps  be  going  too  far  to  infer  such  an  intention  from  the 
grantee's  omission  in  this  particular.  As  to  his  acts  and  declara- 
tions from  the  time  of  the  grant  until  the  conveyance  to  the  present 
claimant,  we  are  wholly  uninformed.  Whether  he  continued  to  assert 
his  rights  to  the  land,  and  whether  those  rights  were  recognized  by  the 
Government,  we  are  ignorant.  And  in  the  absence  of  proof  we  are 
perhaps  justified  in  supposing  that  he  considered  his  right  to  the 
land  sufficiently  secured  by  the  title  he  had  received,  particularly 
as  the  causes  which  prevented  a  settlement  by  him  would  also  deter 
others  from  applying  for  the  land. 

But  admitting  that  the  explanation  of  the  grantee's  delay  in  this 
case  is  sufficient,  within  the  rule  laid  down  in  Fremont's  case,  to 
repel  the  idea  of  a  voluntary  abandonment  and  consequent  for- 
feiture, it  is  to  be  remembered  that  the  grant  in  this  case  was  not 
like  that  to  Alvarado,  a  definitive  or  final  title  with  conditions  sub- 
sequent annexed.  It  was  but  an  inchoate  or  imperfect  grant,  and 
as  has  been  shown,  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  grant  under  the  col- 
onization laws  passing  final  title  to  the  land. 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  167 

No6  V.  United  States. 

The  inquiry  in  this  case  would  therefore  seem  to  be,  not  as  in 
Fremont's  case,  whether  the  omission  to  perform  conditions  subse- 
quent had  forfeited  an  estate  vested  in  the  grantee  bj  a  formal  and 
definitive  grant,  but  whether  he  is  in  equity  entitled  to  a  comple- 
tion and  perfection  of  the  inchoate  title  or  equitable  right  he  re- 
ceived from  the  former  Government. 

Under  the  Mexican  colonization  laws  the  strongest  claim  he  could 
urge  would  be  the  fact  that  he  had,  by  settling  upon  and  improving 
the  land,  given  the  only  consideration  for  the  grant  their  laws  or 
policy  required. 

But  in  this  case  he  can  found  his  claim  upon  no  such  considera- 
tion ;  and  though  he  may  not  be  deemed  to  have  voluntarily  aban- 
doned his  grant,  yet  he  can  allege  nothing  done  by  him  subsequent 
to  it,  or  on  the  faith  of  it,  which  strengthens  his  equitable  claim 
either  upon  this  or  the  former  Government.  If  then  this  grant  had 
been  solely  on  consideration  of  future  settlement  and  occupation,  it 
seems  to  me  that  it  should  be  rejected. 

But  it  appears  that  the  petitioner  had  other  claims,  not  merely 
on  the  bounty  but  on  the  justice  of  the  Mexican  Government.  In 
his  petition  he  appeals  to  the  Governor's  knowledge  of  the  fact  that 
he  had  impaired  his  capital  by  furnishing  money  to  different  Gov- 
ernors, and  that  he  had  faithfully  served  in  the  militia  without  re- 
ceiving pay,  owing  to  the  scarcity  of  funds  in  the  national  exchequer. 
He  asks  for  the  grant  as  a  recompense  for  his  services,  as  well  as 
because  it  would  be  in  accordance  with  the  policy  of  the  coloniza- 
tion laws.  The.  Governor,  in  acceding  to  the  petition,  expressly 
says  that  he  does  so  "  in  consideration  of  the  services  and  merits 
herein  mentioned ;  "  and  by  the  testimony  of  Alvarado  himself, 
taken  in  this  Court,  it  appears  that  the  petitioner  was  actually  a 
creditor  to  the  Government  for  advances  made  by  him,  as  well  as 
entitled  to  its  consideration  for  his  patriotic  services. 

In  the  case  of  Fremont  the  Supreme  Court  say :  "  Although  this 
cannot  be  regarded  as  a  money  consideration,  making  the  trans- 
action a  purchase  from  the  Government,  yet  it  is  the  acknowledg- 
ment of  a  just  and  equitable  claim  ;  and  when  the  grant  was  made 
on  that  consideration,  the  title  in  a  court  of  equity  ought  to  be  as 
firm  and  vaHd  as  if  it  had  been  purchased  with  money  on  the  same 
condition." 


168  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Noe  V.  United  States. 

But  in  that  case  the  consideration  alluded  to  was  the  "  patriotic 
services  of  the  petitioner,  and  they  are  only  referred  to  in  the  grant 
as  entitling  his  application  to  a  "  preference  "  over  other  applica- 
tions for  favorable  consideration.  But  in  the  case  at  bar  the  peti- 
tioner had  not  only  faithfully  served  the  country,  but  appears  to 
have  been  a  creditor  for  advances  made  by  him  and  pay  due  to  him 
as  a  soldier. 

The  observations  of  the  Supreme  Court  apply,  therefore,  with 
great  force  to  the  present  case.  If  then  the  petitioner  cannot  be 
deemed  to  have  voluntarily  abandoned  his  grant,  it  has  seemed  to 
me  that  the  equitable  right  he  acquired,  on  the  considerations  men- 
tioned, ought  to  be  respected,  although  he  has  failed  to  furnish  the 
other  consideration  of  settlement  and  occupation,  upon  which  in 
general  Mexican  grants  were  made.  It  can  hardly  be  doubted  that, 
as  testified  by  Alvarado,  the  former  Government  would  have  felt 
itself  bound  to  perfect  a  title  promised  to  him  by  the  Governor 
under  such  circumstances  ;  and  that  the  grant  by  the  latter  of  the 
land,  provided  it  was  vacant,  would,  had  the  petitioner  subsequently 
.apphed  for  the  formal  title,  have  been  treated  as  giving  him  a  right 
to  have  it  issued.  That  equitable  obligation  is  as  binding  on  the 
conscience  of  this  as  of  the  former  Government,  and  it  has,  after 
much  consideration,  appeared  to  me  that  the  claim  should  be  con- 
firmed. 

The  counsel  for  the  claimant  has  urgently  pressed  upon  the  Court 
that  the  grant  in  this  case  was  not  made  under  the  colonization 
law  of  1824,  and  the  regulations  of  1828,  but  under  the  law  of 
April  4,  1837.  (1  Rockwell,  627.)  But  this  view  cannot  be 
supported.  That  law,  even  if  it  were  ever  carried  into  effect  in 
California,  merely  authorizes  "  the  Government  with  the  consent  of 
the  Council,"  to  give  effect  to  the  colonization  of  the  lands  of  the 
Republic,  by  means  of  sale  or  mortgage — "  applying  the  amount  to 
the  redemption  of  the  national  debt,"  etc. 

This  evidently  confers  the  authority  on  the  Supreme  Govern- 
ment, and  we  accordingly  find  that  a  decree  was  made  by  the 
Supreme  Government  in  virtue  of  the  authority  conferred  by  the 
law  of  the  fourth  of  April,  by  which  a  national  consolidated  stock  was 
created,  and  100,000,000  acres  of  land,  in  various  departments, 


JUNE  TERM,  1856.  169 

Noe  V.  United  States. 

pledged  to  secure  it.  In  case  the  land  so  pledged  should  be  sold, 
it  was  provided  that  the  sale  should  be  at  the  rate,  at  least,  of  four 
acres  to  the  pound ;  and  the  purchase  money  was  to  be  paid  by  the 
purchaser  to  Government  agents  in  London,  to  be  used  by  them  for 
the  redemption  of  the  stock. 

It  is  evident  that  the  grant  in  the  case  at  bar  was  not  a  purchase 
under  this  law.  The  petition  itself  repels  such  an  idea,  for  the  pe- 
titioner refers  to  the  colonization  laws,  and  their  intention  and  policy, 
as  giving  authority  and  furnishing  a  proper  inducement  to  the  grant. 

It  is  clear  that  this  grant  was  a  concession  under  the  colonization 
laws — not  a  sale  under  the  law  of  1837. 

The  land  is  described  in  the  petition  as  situated  in  the  "  waste 
part  of  the  Sacramento  frontier,  about  eighteen  leagues  from  the 
establishment  of  Don  Aug.  Sutter.  This  land  is  bounded  by  the 
Sacramento  river  like  an  island,  and  is  indicated  by  a  hill  on  the 
bank  of  the  river,  which  there  divides  itself  into  two  arms  east  and 
west,  and  contains  five  square  leagues,  more  or  less,  agreeably  to 
the  plan  which  I  shall  present  as  soon  as  circumstances  shall  permit 
me  so  to  do." 

The  Governor  granted  the  petitioner  the  land  he  requested.  The 
diseno  has  not  been  produced,  although  the  grantee  testifies  that  it 
was  furnished. 

It  nowhere  appears  from  the  evidence  what  quantity  of  land  is 
embraced  within  the  limits  of  the  island  mentioned  by  the  petitioner. 
The  grant  could  not,  however,  by  law,  have  been  for  a  greater 
quantity  than  eleven  leagues. 

The  tract  is  described  in  the  petition  as  "  bounded  by  the  Sacra- 
mento river  like  an  island,"  and  the  Governor  in  his  marginal  de- 
cree grants  "  the  land  solicited."  The  subject  of  the  grant  would 
therefore  seem  to  be  the  island  mentioned  ;  and  we  think  the  claim 
should  be  confirmed  to  the  land  included  Avithin  its  limits,  provided 
that  they  do  not  embrace  more  than  the  quantity  of  eleven  leagues. 

It  is  stated  by  counsel  that  the  quantity  of  land  included  in  the 
island  is  somewhat  more  than  six  leagues.  The  petitioner  repre- 
sents it  as  five  leagues,  more  or  less.  This  is  perhaps  as  close  an 
approximation  to  the  real  quantity  as  often  occurred  under  the  loose 
and  inaccurate  ideas  of  the  extent  of  land  formed  by  the  former  in- 


170  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Rodriguez. 

habitants  of  this  country ;  and  as  the  Governor,  we  think,  intended 
to  give  the  island,  and  as  no  deception  seems  to  have  been  practiced 
upon  him,  the  claim  should  be  sustained  for  the  whole  land  which 
the  petitioner  intended  to  solicit,  and  the  Governor  to  grant. 


THE   UNITED    STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  MANUEL  ROD- 
RIGUEZ, CLAIMING  THE  RaNCHO  BuTANO. 

The  validity  of  this  claim  established  by  archive  evidence. 

Claim  for  one  league  of  land  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  confirmed  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Jeremiah  Clarke,  for  Appellee. 

The  claim  in  this  case  was  confirmed  by  the  Board.  An  appeal 
having  been  taken  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  but  the  cause 
has  been  submitted  to  this  Court  without  argument,  or  the  sug- 
gestion, on  the  part  of  the  appellant,  of  any  objection  to  the  valid- 
ity of  the  claim. 

The  claimant,  and  those  under  whom  he  derives  title,  appear 
to  have  been  in  possession  of  the  premises  in  question  for  nearly 
twenty  years ;  and  though  the  original  title  delivered  to  the  inter- 
ested party  has  been  recently  lost,  we  agree  with  the  Board  in 
considering  the  secondary  evidence  of  its  contents  as  sufficient. 

In  all  these  cases,  the  evidence  from  the  archives  is  perhaps  even 
more  satisfactory  than  that  afforded  by  the  production  of  an  alleged 
original  title ;  for  the  facihties  for  the  commission  of  a  forgery  of 
this  single  paper  are  far  greater  than  are  offered  for  the  perpetra- 
tion of  the  same  crime,  when  numerous  documents  have  to  be 
forged  and  subsequently  introduced  among  the  archives.  A  list  of 
the  latter  have  long  since  been  made,  and  no  new  expediente  could 
now  be  placed  amongst  them  without  imminent  risk  of  detection. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  171 

United  States  v.  Sheldon  ct  al. 

In  this  case  the  record  of  the  proceedings  is  full  and  minute, 
and  the  character  of  the  documents  and  the  number  of  the  signa- 
tures afford  intrinsic  evidence  of  genuineness.  If  to  this  be  added 
the  fact  of  long  continued  possession,  from  a  date  anterior  to  the 
provisional  grant,  we  are  unavoidably  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
grant  must  have  issued  at  the  time  and  in  the  terms  alleged  by  the 
claimant. 

We  think  a  decree  of  confirmation  should  be  entered. 


THE    UNITED     STATES,   Appellants,    vs.   CATHERINE 
SHELDON  et  aL,  claiming  the  Rancho  Omochumnes. 

The  validity  of  tliis  claim  not  disputed. 

Claim  for  five  leagues  of  land  in  Sacramento  county,  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Robinson  &  Morrison,  for  Appellees. 

This  case  has  been  confirmed  by  the  Board  and  submitted  to  this 
Court  without  argument  or  the  production  of  additional  testimony. 

There  cannot,  we  think,  be  any  doubt  as  to  the  genuineness  of 
the  grant ;  nor  does  such  an  idea  seem  to  have  been  suggested",. 
The  temporary  loss  of  the  first  expediente  and  its  subsequent  dis- 
covery among  the  archives,  and  the  confusion  and  mistake  which 
arose,  of  themselves  afford  strong  evidence  of  the  authenticity  of 
the  proceedings. 

The  grantee  appears  to  have  resided  on  his  land  from  1844,  a 
few  months  after  he  received  his  grant,  until  his  death  in  1851. 

We  see  no  reason  to  reverse  the  decree  of  the  Board,  and  a 
decree  affirming  must  therefore  be  entered. 
12 


172  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Pico  et  al. 

THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  v8.  MARIA  ANTONIA 
PICO  et  al,,  CLAIMING  THE  Rancho  Punta  del  Ano  Nuevo. 

This  claim  not  contested  by  the  United  States. 

Claim  for  four  leagues  of  land  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  confirmed 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Stanly  &  King,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  was  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  has  been 
submitted  to  us  without  argument  or  observation,  or  the  production 
of  additional  testimony.  The  grant  is  produced  and  proved,  and 
the  expediente  is  duly  found  in  the  archives  of  the  former  Govern- 
ment. 

The  occupation  of  the  land  by  the  grantee  in  1840,  two  years 
before  the  title  issued,  is  also  shown  ;  and  it  further  appears  that  in 
1842  another  house  was  built  by  him,  and  that  wheat,  corn,  beans, 
melons  and  potatoes  were  cultivated  by  him.  There  is  nothing  in 
the  testimony  to  afford  the  slightest  presumption  of  an  abandonment 
of  his  grant  by  the  grantee  during  the  existence  of  the  former 
Government. 

The  Board,  after  an  attentive  examination  of  the  grant  and 
accompanying  diseiio,  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  intention  of 
the  Governor  was  to  grant  by  metes  and  bounds.  The  description 
of  the  boundaries  is  unusually  precise,  and  there  is  no  reason  to 
suppose  that  the  quantity  of  land  included  within  them  exceeds 
that  mentioned  in  the  grant. 

We  think  that  the  decision  of  the  Board  should  be  affirmed  and 
a  decree  of  confirmation  entered. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  173 

McKec  V.  United  States. 

WILLIAM  H.  McKEE,  claiming  the  Rancho  Jacinto,  Appel- 
lant, vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

The  ohjection  l)y  tlie  Board  met  by  further  testimony  taken  in  this  Court. 

Claim  for  eight  leagues  of  land  in  Colusi  county,  rejected  by  the 
Board,  and  appealed  by  claimant. 

E.  W.  F.  Sloan,  for  Appellant. 

William  Blanding,  LTnited  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  was  rejected  by  the  Board,  not  however 
because  any  doubt  was  entertained  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the 
grant,  but  because  no  sufficient  performance  of  the  conditions  was 
shown.  The  subsequent  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  case 
of  Fremont  has  established  a  different  rule  for  our  guidance,  and 
the  testimony  taken  in  this  Court  on  appeal  is  abundantly  sufficient 
to  remove  the  only  objection  urged  by  the  Board  to  a  confirmation 
of  the  claim. 

Abner  Bryan  swears  that  the  rancho  claimed  by  the  appellant 
was  known  as  Dr.  McKee's  rancho;  that  in  1846  and  1847  he  was 
employed  by  McKee  to  take  charge  of  and  cultivate  it ;  that  he 
built  a  house  upon  and  planted  it  with  corn,  wheat  and  potatoes ; 
that  he  had  upon  it  about  one  hundred  head  of  cattle,  and  from 
twenty-five  to  thirty  horses  and  some  hogs.  The  witness  remained 
on  the  land  until  the  end  of  1847,  when  he  left  it,  and  Capt.  G. 
Swift  took  charge  of  the  stock. 

Jos^  Castro  testifies  that  Rodrigues,  the  original  grantee,  was  a 
civil  and  mihtary  officer  of  the  Mexican  Government ;  that  on  re- 
ceiving his  grant  he  was  not  required  to  occupy  the  land,  as  his 
services  were  needed  in  the  army.  He  was  subsequently  trans- 
ferred from  the  military  to  the  civil  service,  but  was  required  to 
hold  himself  in  readiness  for  service  in  the  army.  He  continued 
to  be  employed  until  July,  1846,  in  the  custom  house  at  Monterey, 
except  at  intervals  when  he  was  called  into  military  service. 

The  witness  further  states  that  at  the  time  of  obtaining  his  grant 
in  1844,  the  Government  owed  him  about  half  of  what  he  had 


174  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Vallejo  V.  United  States. 

earned  as  an  officer  of  the  army,  but  it  was  without  funds  to  pay 
him,  and  the  witness  states  his  behef  that  the  debt  has  never  been 
paid. 

The  grant  in  this  case  does  not  contain  the  usual  condition  of 
occupation  and  inhabitation,  and  the  above  testimony  satisfactorily 
explains  the  reasons  of  the  omission. 

We  think  that  there  is  no  evidence  in  the  case  to  authorize  the 
presumption  that  the  claim  was  abandoned  by  the  grantee,  or  that 
he  is  now  attempting  to  resume  it  owing  to  the  enhanced  value  of 
the  land.  On  the  contrary,  the  reasons  of  his  delay  are  fully  ex- 
plained, and  were  such  as  were  not  only  received  by  the  former 
Government,  but  were  immediately  owing  to  their  own  express 
commands. 

We  think,  therefore,  that  a  decree  of  confirmation  should  be 
entered. 


MARIANO  G.  VALLEJO,  claiming  the  Rancho  Yulupa,  vs. 
THE  UNITED  STATES. 

The  objection  that  the  land  claimed  was  not  segregated  from  the  public  domain, 
removed  by  further  testimony  taken  in  this  Court. 

Claim  for  three  leagues  of  land  in  Sonoma  county,  rejected  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimant. 

B.  S.  Brooks,  for  Appellant. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claimant  in  this  case  has  produced  the  original  grant  by 
Gov.  Micheltorena  to  Miguel  Alvarado,  dated  Nov.  23d,  1844. 

This  grant  was  approved  by  the  Departmental  Assembly  on  the 
eighteenth  of  February,  1845. 

The  genuineness  of  the  grant  is  fully  proved,  and  the  occupation 
of  and  the  cultivation  of  a  portion  of  the  land  established  by  testi- 
mony. The  claim  was  rejected  by  the  Board  for  the  reason  that 
the  tract  granted  was  not  segregated  from  the  public  domain. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  175 

Rodriguez  et  al  v.  United  States. 

The  land  is  described  in  the  grant  as  known  bj  the  name  of  Yu- 
lupa,  and  bounded  by  the. ranches  of  Pctaluma,  Cotate,  Santa  Rosa 
and  Los  Guilicos.  Jasper  O'Farrell,  who  was  a  Government  Sur- 
veyor in  1847  and  1848,  and  as  such  surveyed  several  ranches  in 
the  vicinity,  states  that  he  knows  the  latter  well,  and  that  the 
rancho  Yulupa  is  situated  between  them  ;  that  it  is  near  the  town  of 
Sonoma,  and  can  easily  be  segregated  from  the  adjoining  ranches. 
Julio  Carillo  testifies  that  he  has  known  the  lands  of  Yulupa  since 
1838  ;  that  it  lies  between  the  ranches  of  "Petaluma,"  "Cotate,'' 
"  Santa  Rosa  "  and  "  Guilicos ; "  that  it  contains  about  three  leagues 
and  is  well  known.  The  witness  further  states  that  Alvarado  built 
a  house  on  the  land,  and  occupied  it  with  cattle  and  horses  in  1843 
or  1844. 

The  evidence  of  these  and  other  witnesses  whose  testimony  has 
been  taken  in  this  Court  on  appeal,  sufficiently,  in  my  opinion, 
estabhshes  the  identity  of  the  land  granted  to  Alvarado,  and  re- 
moves the  only  objection  urged  to  a  confirmation  of  the  claim. 

A  decree  of  confirmation  must  therefore  be  entered. 


RAMON   RODRIGUEZ   et  al,  claiming  the  Rancho   Agua 

PUERCA     Y     LAS     TrANCAS,    APPELLANTS,    VS.    THE    UNITED 

STATES. 

Objections  by  the  Board  met  by  the  additional  testimony  taken  in  tins  Court. 

Claim  for  one  league  of  land  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  rejected  hj 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimants. 

D.  S.  Gregory,  for  Appellants. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  was  rejected  by  the  Board  on  the  grounds  : 
1st.  That  there  was  no  proof  of  occupation  and  cultivation.  2d. 
No  juridical  measurement  or  possession.  3d.  No  proof  of  the  bound- 
aries or  of  the  quantity  of  land  included  in  the   claim.     These 


176  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT 


United  States  v.  Alvisu. 


objections  have  been  met  by  additional  testimony  taken  in  this 
Court. 

Jose  de  la  Cruz  Rodriguez  deposes  that  he  was  born  within  a 
few  miles  of  the  rancho  ;  that  its  boundaries  are  well  known  ;  that 
they  are,  on  the  north  the  Sierra,  on  the  east  the  Canada  of  Agua 
Puerco,  on  the  south  the  ocean,  and  on  the  west  the  Canada  de  las 
Trancas.  He  also  swears  that  in  March,  1844,  which  was  about 
five  months  after  the  grant,  it  was  occupied  by  Rodriguez  and 
Alviso,  the  grantees  ;  that  they  built  houses  and  corrals,  and  lived 
upon  it  for  two  years  after  that  time,  and  that  it  has  remained  in 
their  possession  ever  since.  Cornelio  Perez  testifies  to  the  same 
effect.  And  Hiram  L.  Scott  not  only  testifies  to  the  general 
recognized  boundaries  of  the  tract  called  "  Agua  Puerca  y  las 
Trancas ^^^  but  states  that  the  land  contained  within  them  is  about 
a  league. 

No  question  appears  to  have  been  made  before  the  Board  as  to 
the  authenticity  of  the  grant,  and  the  case  has  been  submitted  to 
this  Court  without  argument  on  the  part  of  the  United  States. 

The  boundaries  of  the  tract  as  sworn  to  by  the  witnesses  are  the 
same  as  those  mentioned  in  the  grant ;  and  the  quantity  of  land 
contained  within  appears  to  correspond  with  sufficient  exactness  to 
that  mentioned  in  the  condition,  viz :  "one  league,  a  little  more  or 
less,  as  explained  by  the  sketch."  I  think,  therefore,  that  the 
claim  should  be  confirmed  according  to  the  boundaries  mentioned 
in  the  grant  and  as  shown  on  the  map. 


THE    UNITED    STATES,  Appellants,  vs.   MANUEL   AL- 
VISU, CLAIMING  THE  RaNCHO   QuITO. 

No  objection  to  the  validity  of  the  claim. 

Claim  for  three  leagues  of  land  in  Santa  Clara  county,  con- 
firmed by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  177 

United  States,  v.  Soto. 

Thornton  &  Williams,  for.  Appellee. 

The  claim  in  this  case  was  confirmed  by  the  Board.  It  has  been 
submitted  to  this  Court  without  argument  or  the  statement  on  the 
part  of  the  appellants  of  any  reasons  for  reversing  their  decree. 
No  doubt  seems  to  have  been  entertained  by  the  Commissioners  as 
to  the  authenticity  of  the  grant.  The  original  is  produced,  and 
the  expediente  is  found  in  the  archives.  The  land  was  occupied 
and  cultivated  by  the  original  grantees,  and  has  continued  in  their 
possession  and  that  of  persons  claiming  under  them  until  the  pres- 
ent day.  Its  boundaries  are  well  known,  and  described  with 
considerable  precision  in  the  grant  and  accompanying  map.  We 
see  no  reason  for  reversing  the  decision  of  the  Board. 

The  claim  must  therefore  be  confirmed. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  TEODORA  SOTO, 

CLAIMING   THE   RaNCHO    CaNADA   DEL   HaMBRE. 
The  weight  of  the  evidence  is  in  favor  of  this  claim. 

Claim  for  three  leagues  of  land  in  Contra  Costa  county,  con- 
firmed by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Crockett  &  Page,  for  Appellee. 

The  documentary  evidence  produced  from  the  archives  in  this 
case  shows  that  in  May,  1842,  Teodora  Soto  petitioned  the  Gov- 
ernor for  a  place  called  "  La  Canada  del  Hambre."  She  repre- 
sented that  her  deceased  husband,  Francisco  Barcenas,  had  obtained 
a  provisional  grant  of  the  land  and  had  occupied  it  with  his  cattle. 
That  shortly  afterwards  he  was  obliged  to  leave  it  in  consequence 
of  a  fire  which  destroyed  the  pasture,  and  had  since  accidentally 
been  killed.     She  therefore  solicited  the  Governor  to  grant  her  the 


178  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Soto. 

land,  though  only  provisionally,  and  until  she  could  present  a  new 
sketch,  and  reminded  him  of  the  services  of  her  late  husband  in 
the  army  for  more  than  ten  years,  and  that  on  his  discharge  more 
than  half  his  pay  was  due  him.  The  Prefect  Guillermo  Castro,  to 
whom  the  Governor  referred  for  information,  reported  that  Barcenas 
had  occupied  the  land  provisionally  until  he  should  obtain  the  grant ; 
that  he  built  a  corral,  but  that  it  was  burnt,  and  Barcenas  was 
obliged  to  withdraw  from  the  premises,  and  soon  after  met  his 
death. 

It  appears,  also,  from  the  report  of  Estrada,  that  the  expediente 
of  the  grant  obtained  by  Barcenas  could  not  be  found  in  the 
archives  ;  but  Jose  Castro  certified  that  Barcenas,  in  1839,  had 
solicited  the  land,  and  it  was  granted  to  him  provisionally. 

On  the  eighth  of  May,  1842,  the  Governor  ordered  a  provisional 
grant  to  be  issued  to  Teodora  Soto  "  while  she  presents  a  plat  of 
the  land  petitioned  for,  subject  to  the  usual  reports." 

By  the  depositions  taken  in  the  case  it  appears  that  Barcenas 
moved  to  the  Rancho  of  Canada  del  Hambre  in  the  year  1836 ; 
that  he  built  a  house  and  corral  upon  it,  and  cultivated  a  part  of  it 
in  corn  and  vegetables.  He  remained  there  about  two  years,  and 
after  his  removal  and  subsequent  death  his  widow  returned  to  it, 
built  a  large  house,  inclosed  and  cultivated  a  portion  of  the  land, 
and  has  continued  to  hve  upon  it  ever  since.  She  has,  however, 
been  driven  from  her  house,  and  now  resides  in  a  small  hut  built  of 
hides  and  tule  and  poles,  which  she  has  constructed  for  a  shelter. 

The  fact  of  her  occupation  of  the  land  is  also  proved  by  Castro, 
who  testifies  that,  in  1843  or  1844,  he  was  ordered  by  the  Governor 
to  report  whether  the  land  was  vacant,  and  that  he  cited  Teodora 
Soto  to  appear.  She  claimed  to  own  the  land,  but  did  not  produce 
her  papers.  She  Avas,  however,  in  the  actual  occupation  of  it, 
and  Castro  so  reported  to  the  Governor. 

The  grant  alleged  to  have  been  issued  by  the  Governor  in  pur- 
suance of  the  order  above  recited  is  not  produced.  Governor 
Alvarado  testifies  that  a  grant  was  issued  in  1841  or  1842,  in  pur- 
suance of  the  decree  of  concession  contained  in  the  expediente. 

Francisco  Pereyra  testifies  that  he  saw  in  the  possession  of  the 
claimant,  in  1849,  documents  relative  to  the  title  of  the  Canada 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  179 

United  States  v.  Soto. 

del  Hambre  ;  that  he  read  them  several  times  ;  that  he  saw  a  docu- 
ment issued  to  Teodora  Soto  by  Alvarado,  and  that  he  was  present 
in  March  or  April  of  1850  when  these  documents  were  delivered 
bj  Teodora  Soto  to  General  Yallejo,  and  that  she  said  at  the  time 
that  they  were  the  title  to  the  Rancho.  On  cross  examination  the 
witness  stated  that  the  document  stated  the  name  of  Teodora's 
husband  ;  that  the  grant  was  made  in  consideration  of  his  having 
been  a  soldier  ;  that  he  did  not  remember  whether  it  required  any 
conditions,  nor  whether  it  was  in  the  usual  form ;  that  Teodora 
Soto  had  sold  a  piece  of  the  land  to  Vallejo  in  1849,  and  that 
he  received  the  title  papers  about  eight  months  after  the  sale — at 
the  time  they  were  delivered  to  Vallejo  he  was  called  upon  by 
Teodora  to  witness  the  fact. 

M.  G.  Vallejo  testified  that  he  had  the  title  papers  in  his  posses- 
sion some  years,  but  that  about  1850,  when  he  and  his  son-in-law 
Frisbie  came  to  look  for  them,  they  could  not  be  found.  In  1850, 
however,  when  Major  Cooper  wished  to  secure  a  preemption  in  the 
vicinity  of  this  land,  he  requested  the  witness  to  have  the  grant 
translated,  and  that  he  accordingly  procured  a  translation  to  be  made 
by  Frederick  Rejedor,  then  public  translator,  but  since  deceased. 
The  witness  then  identified  the  translation  as  a  correct  translation 
of  the  original  grant  which  he  had  seen  and  knew  to  be  genuine. 

The  original,  he  says,  he  dehvered  to  Capt.  Frisbie  to  be  placed 
in  his  safe,  and  he  has  never  since  been  able  to  find  it. 

Capt.  Frisbie  testifies  that  he  had  the  original  grant  in  his  pos- 
session in  1819  or  1850  ;  that  he  sent  it  to  Sonoma,  and  it  was 
returned  to  him,  as  he  thinks,  with  the  translation  on  file  in  the  case. 
The  paper  when  returned  to  him,  if  returned  at  all,  was  tied  up 
in  a  handkerchief  and  thrown  into  an  iron  safe  either  by  him  or 
some  of  his  clerks  ;  that  some  time  after  the  claimant  applied  to  him 
for  her  papers,  to  be  used  in  a  law  suit — on  opening  the  handker- 
chief he  found  the  translation,  but  not  the  original  document ;  that 
he  searched  for  it  diligently,  and  wrote  to  General  Vallejo  at  Sono- 
ma for  it,  but  could  not  find  it.  General  Vallejo,  he  says,  insisted 
that  he  had  sent  it  back  in  the  handkerchief,  but  the  witness  could 
never  ascertain  what  had  become  of  it. 

The  witness  further  states  that  he  read  the  translation  soon  after 


180  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


United  States  v.  Soto. 


having  the  original  in  his  possession  ;  that  he  then  thought  and 
now  thinks  the  translation  was  correct.  He  identifies  the  hand- 
writing of  the  translation  as  that  of  Rejedor,  a  teacher  in  Sonoma 
and  a  public  translator  in  that  district. 

The  grant,  as  appears  by  the  translation,  is  of  three  sitios  "  of 
that  which  shall  remain  over  from  the  ranchos  of  the  Pinole  and 
Mr.  Welsh,  after  they  shall  have  been  duly  measured." 

By  evidence  taken  in  this  Court  on  appeal  it  appears  that  both 
Vallejo  and  Frisbie  were,  at  the  time  of  giving  their  testimony, 
interested  in  maintaining  the  grant — having  purchased  a  pbrtion  of 
the  land  from  the  claimant.  The  objection  was  not,  however, 
taken  at  the  time  their  testimony  was  given,  nor  has  any  motion 
been  made  to  suppress  their  depositions.  It  however  affects  their 
credibility,  and  if  the  proof  of  the  existence  of  the  original  grant 
rested  on  their  testimony  alone,  it  might  well  be  regarded  as  un- 
satisfactory. But  Alvarado,  the  Governor,  and  Francisco  Pereyra 
both  swear,  the  one  that  he  issued  the  grant,  the  other  that  he  saw 
it  in  the  possession  of  the  claimant. 

The  expediente  contains  the  order  of  concession  upon  which  a 
grant  would  issue  as  of  course  ;  and  Castro  testifies  that  in  1842  or 
1843  the  claimant  was  in  actual  occupation  of  the  land,  claiming  it 
as  her  own.  The  date  of  the  grant  in  the  translation  is  1841 ; 
while  the  order  of  concession  is  1842.  This  discrepency  was 
noticed  by  the  Board  ;  but  though  calculated  to  excite  suspicion,  it 
was  considered  that  it  might  with  greater  probability  be  attributed 
to  a  mistake  of  the  translator  than  received  as  evidence  that  no  such 
grant  was  ever  issued. 

The  United  States  have  also  produced  in  evidence  a  communica- 
tion of  Jose  R.  Estrada  to  the  Justice  of  the  Peace  of  Contra 
Costa.  In  this  communication  Estrada  states  that  he  was  directed 
by  the  Governor  to  inform  the  Judge  that  there  had  been  dispatched 
to  Don  Ignacio  Martinez  the  title  of  the  tract  called  '•'  Pinole  ;  " 
and  that  Doha  Teodora  Soto  should  be  informed  that  the  pretension 
she  has  to  occupy  the  tract  called  the  Canada  del  Hambre  has  no 
foundation,  for  that  it  belongs  to  the  mentioned  tract  of  El  Pinole. 

This  communication  is  dated  June  2d,  1842.  The  order  of  con- 
cession in  the  expediente  bears  date  May  8th,  of  the  same  year. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  181 

United  States  v.  Soto. 

Alvarado,  though  he  recognizes  the  handwriting  of  Estrada,  is 
unable  to  remember  that  he  directed  the  communication  to  be  made ; 
and  all  that  can  be  inferred  from  the  document,  assuming  that  it 
was  written  in  pursuance  of  the  orders  of  the  Governor,  is,  that  the 
claim  of  Teodora  Soto  to  any  part  of  the  Pinole  Rancho  was  dis- 
allowed by  the  Government.  But  this  would  rather  seem  to  con- 
firm and  strengthen  the  evidence  in  favor  of  the  grant ;  for  in  that 
instrument  the  land  granted  is  expressly  limited  to  "  three  sitios  of 
that  which  shall  be  left  over  from  the  ranches  of  the  Pinole  and 
Mr.  Welsh." 

If,  then,  after  the  issuing  of  this  grant  the  Pinole  Rancho  had 
been  found  to  embrace  any  portion  of  the  land  claimed  by  Teodora 
Soto  to  have  been  granted  to  her,  the  communication  of  Estrada 
would  naturally  have  been  made,  and  would  have  been  entirely  con- 
sistent with  the  rights  really  acquired  by  Teodora  Soto. 

Obliged  as  we  are  in  these  cases  to  found  our  judgment  upon 
testimony  not  in  all  respects  reliable,  it  is  impossible  to  affirm  with 
certainty  that  the  grant  issued.  I  think,  however,  that  the  proofs 
preponderate  in  favor  of  that  supposition.  There  seems  no  good 
reason  to  suppose  that  the  Governor  withheld  the  grant  which  he 
himself  ordered  to  be  issued.  The  destitute  condition  of  the  appli- 
cant, and  the  services  and  misfortunes  of  her  husband,  must  have 
commended  her  apphcation  to  his  favor  ;  and  we  find  her  occupying 
and  claiming  the  land  from  about  the  date  of  the  alleged  grant  to 
the  present  time. 

The  nature  and  extent  of  the  improvements  made  by  her  would 
seem  to  indicate  that  she  then  considered  herself  as  owning  the 
land,  and  even  the  fact  that  in  1849  Vallejo  purchased  a  portion  of 
it  from  her  might,  perhaps,  be  considered  a  corroborating  circum- 
stance, for  it  implies  a  recognition  on  his  part  of  her  rights  at  an 
early  day,  and  before  the  rise  in  value  of  the  land  presented  tempta- 
tions to  manufacture  spurious  titles. 

The  Board,  notwithstanding  some  suspicions  which  attend  the 
case,  confirmed  the  claim,  and  we  have  not  discovered  sufficient 
reasons  for  reversing  their  decision. 

The  claim,  however,  must  be  strictly  limited  to  the  land  granted  ; 
and  it  can  only  embrace  such  portion  of  the  Canada  del  Hambre, 


182  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Soto  et  al. 

not  exceeding  three  leagues,  as  is  not  included  within  the  limits  of 
the  ranches  of  El  Pinole  and  Mr.  Welsh,  when  the  same  shall  have 
been  duly  ascertained. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  BARBARA  SOTO 
et  al.,  CLAIMING  THE  Rancho  San  Lorenzo. 

This  claim  is  valid  for  the  laud  included  within  the  boundaries  named  in  the 
grant. 

Claim  for  one  league  and  a  half  of  land  in  Contra  Costa  (now 
Alameda)  county,  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the 
United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Thornton  &  Williams,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  is  founded  on  two  grants — one  by  Alva- 
rado  dated  Oct.  10th,  1842,  and  the  other  by  Micheltorena  dated 
January  20th,  1844,  for  the  sobrante  of  half  a  league  contained 
within  the  boundaries  of  the  first.  The  land  was  described  in  the 
first  grant  as  follows :  "  One  league,  a  httle  more  or  less,  in  the 
tract  called  San  Lorenzo,  the  limits  of  which  are  from  the  creek  of 
that  name  to  that  called  "  El  Alto,"  pertaining  to  Don  Jesus  Val- 
lejo,  and  from  this  creek,  drawing  a  right  line  to  pass  by  the  rodeo, 
to  the  beach,  and  from  this  point  to  the  first  ridge  which  the  hills 
form,  excepting  the  number  of  varas  which  have  been  conceded  in 
said  tract  to  Don  Guillermo  Castro,  which  shall  be  determined  at 
the  time  of  the  possession." 

At  the  time  the  grant  issued,  Castro  was  owner  of  a  tract  of 
six  hundred  varas  square,  upon  which  he  resided.  He,  in  October, 
1843,  obtained  a  concession  of  a  larger  tract,  which  was  described 
as  "  bounded  by  the  rancho  of  Soto  on  the  side  next  the  main  road, 
it  being  considered  that  there  has  already  been  made  a  concession 
to  the  said  Soto  on  the  side  towards  the  beach. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  183 

United  States  v.  Soto  et  al. 

The  main  road  alluded  to  crosses  the  tract  from  creek  to  creek, 
and  it  was  contended  by  Castro  that  the  main  road  was  the  western 
boundary  of  his  land,  and  that  the  grant  to  him  was  a  virtual  set- 
tlement of  the  line  between  him  and  Soto,  which  in  the  grant  to 
the  latter  had  been  left  for  subsequent  adjustment. 

Proceedings  were  instituted  to  settle  this  dispute,  and  it  was 
finally  determined  by  a  compromise  made  with  the  approval  of  the 
Governor.  The  line  as  thus  settled  was  described  in  a  document 
drawn  up  for  the  purpose,  which  appears  in  the  archives,  and  a  copy 
of  which  is  endorsed  on  both  expedientes. 

The  boundary  of  Castro  as  thus  settled  is  as  follows :  ^'  Com- 
mencing on  the  sanjon  (or  ditch)  where  it  is  parallel  with  the  south- 
ern side  of  Castro's  house,  and  down  the  sanjon  towards  the  main 
road  six  hundred  varas,  from  which  point,  where  they  conclude,  by 
a  straight  line  to  the  San  Lorenzo  creek.  The  boundary  on  the 
other  side  of  the  sanjon  is  the  margin  (orilla)  of  the  hills  towards 
the  plain,  measuring  ten  varas  up  on  the  hills." 

These  proceedings  must  be  taken  as  a  final  and  definite  settle- 
ment of  the  eastern  line  of  Soto's  ranch,  and  as  such  it  was  ac- 
quiesced in  and  recognized  by  the  parties.  The  line  thus  desig- 
nated can,  as  appears  from  the  proofs,  be  readily  located,  and  the 
testimony  of  the  neighbors,  particularly  that  of  Guiilermo  Castro, 
shows  that  the  location  as  determined  from  the  description  in  the 
agreement  in  no  respect  differs  from  the  line  as  understood  and 
recognized  by  the  parties  themselves  and  neighboring  rancheros. 

On  the  twentieth  of  January,  1844,  Soto  addressed  a  petition  to 
the  Governor,  setting  forth  that  the  concession  of  the  tract  which 
he  occupies,  called  San  Lorenzo,  expresses  to  have  an  extension  of 
one  sitio  (square  league)  a  little  more  or  less ;  that  the  overplus 
which  it  may  have  towards  the  beach  may  be  half  a  sitio,  which  he 
begs  may  be  conceded  to  him,  as  united  with  the  other  it  would 
be  of  much  benefit  to  him."  On  this  petition  the  Secretary  re- 
ports that  there  is  no  objection  to  granting  it,  but  that  the  petitioner 
must  subject  himself  to  the  limits  which  his  first  title  calls  for,  and 
to  the  agreement  celebrated  with  Don  Carlos  Castro.  On  receiv- 
ing this  report  the  Governor  acceded  to  the  petition  in  the  follovying 
words  :  "  In  conformity  with  the  foregoing,  Michel torena," — 


184  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Soto  et  al. 

It  is  objected  that  this  was  not  a  valid  grant  of  the  sobrante  or 
overplus.  But  in  the  first  place,  it  appears  from  the  archives  that 
the  same  formalities  were  rarely  if  ever  observed  in  relinquishing  a 
sobrante  to  the  grantee,  within  the  general  limits  of  whose  grant  it 
was  found,  as  were  deemed  necessary  in  making  an  original  con- 
cession, or  a  grant  of  a  sobrante  to  a  stranger.  The  grant  of  the 
sobrante  to  him  within  whose  limits  it  was  found,  was  little  more 
than  a  waiver  or  release  of  the  condition  of  the  original  grant, 
which  restricted  him  to  a  specific  quantity,  and  the  original  grant 
(that  condition  being  struck  out)  would  by  its  terms  convey  the 
whole  land  within  the  limits  designated.  At  all  events,  there  can 
be  no  doubt  in  this  case  that  the  Governor  intended  to  accede  to 
the  petition,  and  the  land  having  under  this  grant,  or  promise  to 
grant,  been  long  occupied  and  enjoyed,  and  on  all  hands  recognized 
as  belonging  to  the  grantee,  the  latter  has  in  any  view  an  equitable 
right  which  the  United  States  are  bound  to  respect. 

The  important  question,  however,  in  the  case,  is  as  to  the  loca- 
tion of  the  southern  boundary.  The  tract  included  within  the  orig- 
inal limits  is  claimed  by  the  appellees  to  be  in  the  form  of  a  square 
or  parallelogram,  and  bounded  on  the  east  by  the  line  between  Cas- 
tro and  Soto  as  it  was  fixed  by  the  agreement  heretofore  alluded 
to,  on  the  south  by  the  Alto  and  a  line  through  the  rodeo  to  the 
beach,  on  the  west  by  the  beach,  and  on  the  north  by  the  San  Lo- 
renzo. 

It  is  contended  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  that  neither  the 
San  Lorenzo  nor  the  beach  is  a  boundary  of  the  tract,  but  that  the 
southern  line  must  be  run  from  the  point  where  the  rodeo  line  or 
northern  boundary  strikes  the  beach,  to  the  first  ridge  which  the 
hills  form.  If  such  a  line  be  drawn,  it  would  form  a  diagonal  to 
the  square  claimed  by  the  appellees,  and  the  tract  would  have  a 
triangular  shape,  with  the  agreed  line  between  Soto  and  Castro  as 
its  base  on  the  east,  and  with  its  apex  touching  the  beach  at  a 
mathematical  point. 

The  language  of  the  grant  has  already  been  quoted.  The  words 
which  it  is  contended  call  for  this  location,  are  as  follows :  "  And 
from  this  creek  (El  Alto)  drawing  a  right  line  to  pass  by  the  rodeo 
to  the  beach,  and  from  this  point  to  the  first  ridge  which  the  hills 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  185 


United  States  v.  Soto  ct  al. 


form,  excepting,"  etc.  It  is  claimed,  and  with  much  apparent 
reason,  that  the  last  line  must  be  drawn  from  the  '^  point  ^^  where 
the  rodeo  here  strikes  the  beach  to  the  first  cuchilla  or  ridge. 

If  the  word  "  punta  "  had  precisely  the  signification  of  the  Eng- 
lish word  '-'•  'point ^"^  as  used  in  surveying,  or  if  the  grant  had  speci- 
fied the  ''point  "  where  the  rodeo  line  strikes  the  heach  as  the  point 
from  which  a  straight  line  was  to  be  drawn  to  the  cuchilla  for  the 
southern  boundary,  the  construction  contended  for  would  be  una- 
voidable. But  the  language  is  "  a  straight  line  drawn  to  the  beach, 
and  from  that  point,"  etc.  It  does  not  in  terms  say  *'  and  from 
the  point  where  said  fine  strikes  the  beach ; "  it  merely  says  "from 
that  point,"  namely,  from  the  beach.  A  reference  to  the  beach 
generally  by  the  term  "  punta,"  is  certainly  not  in  accordance  with 
our  use  of  language  ;  but  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  discover, 
such  a  construction  of  the  term  is  not  inadmissible  in  Spanish.  If, 
however,  there  were  no  other  guide  to  the  intentions  of  the  grantor, 
this  construction  might  probably  be  deemed  forced  and  unnatural. 

There  are  other  considerations,  however,  which  I  think  remove 
any  reasonable  doubt  as  to  its  propriety. 

In  fixing  the  Kmits  of  land  to  be  granted,  both  the  law  and  usage 
of  the  Californians  required  them  to  adopt  as  nearly  as  possible  a 
rectangular  or  square  figure.  This  was  not  in  all  cases  practicable, 
but  in  a  country  used  almost  exclusively  for  grazing,  and  where  no 
fences  were  built,  it  became  necessary  to  designate  great  natural 
objects  as  the  boundaries  of  the  tracts  conceded.  It  seems  there- 
fore extremely  improbable  that  in  this  instance  the  natural  and  ob- 
vious boundary  afforded  by  the  shore  of  a  great  estuary  should  be 
wholly  neglected,  and  the  land  should  assume  the  form  of  a  trian- 
gle, having  only  a  mathematical  point  at  its  apex  resting  on  the 
beach,  while  one  of  the  sides  should  diagonally  cross  the  centre  of 
a  large  plain  with  no  visible  object  throughout  its  length,  except  at 
its  extremities,  to  determine  its  location.  This  is  the  more  improb- 
able as  the  whole  of  the  neighboring  land  had  been  before,  or  was 
subsequently,  granted,  and  the  piece  of  land  excluded  by  the  diag- 
onal line  alluded  to,  if  not  embraced  within  the  grant  to  Soto,  has 
remained  from  some  unexplained  reason  the  only  piece  of  ungranted 
land  in  the  vicinity. 


186  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT 


United  States  v.  Soto  et  al. 


The  original  grant  to  Soto  was  for  one  league  within  the  limits 
specified.  He  subsequently,  as  we  have  seen,  obtained  the  sobrante 
of  about  half  a  league  more.  This  was  after  the  boundary  between 
him  and  Castro  had  been  fixed. 

Taking  then  that  boundary  as  determined,  there  is  found  within 
the  limits  as  claimed  by  him  about  one  square  league  and  a  half, 
precisely  the  quantity  granted  to  him  in  the  two  grants.  But  if 
the  diagonal  line  be  drawn  as  proposed,  he  would  have  but  about 
two-thirds  of  a  league  in  all,  leaving  his  sobrante  grant  wholly  in- 
operative, for  even  his  first  grant  of  one  league  could  not  be  satis- 
fied out  of  the  tract  so  limited.  It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  Soto 
did  not  petition  for  an  augmentation  or  extension,  but  for  a  sobrante 
or  overplus — the  excess  within  the  original  boundaries  over  and 
above  the  quantity  to  which  he  was  restricted.  This  excess  he 
states  to  be  about  half  a  league,  while  he  also  mentions  that  his 
first  grant  was  for  one  league. 

If  then  the  limits  of  the  land  as  designated  in  his  grant,  after 
the  Castro  line  was  fixed,  included  less  than  a  league  as  is  now  con- 
tended, the  petition  for  a  sobrante  of  half  a  league  more  within 
those  limits  was  absurd.  Had  he  or  the  Governor  supposed  that 
the  quantity  already  granted  could  not  be  found  within  the  limits  of 
the  tract,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  one  would  have  asked  for 
and  the  other  conceded  half  a  league  more  within  those  limits.  In 
such  case  he  would  have  asked  for,  not  a  sobrante,  but  an  augmen- 
tation, and  would  have  obtained  his  additional  quantity  outside  of 
and  beyond  his  original  boundaries.  The  fact  that  the  land,  ac- 
cording to  the  boundaries  he  contends  for,  is  nearly  exactly  the 
quantity  (one  league  and  a  half)  granted  to  him,  seems  to  me  al- 
most conclusive  as  to  what  he  intended  to  ask  for  and  the  Governor 
to  give. 

The  value  of  land  to  the  former  inhabitants  of  this  country  in  a 
great  degree  depended  upon  the  existence  of  abundant  supplies  of 
fresh  water,  or  "  agua  dolce,"  for  cattle.  The  line  proposed  would 
not  only  form  an  acute  angle  at  the  beach,  but  would  touch  the 
San  Lorenzo  creek  only  at  a  single  mathematical  point,  thus  cutting 
ofi"  all  access  to  that  stream,  and  either  depriving  the  rancho  alto- 
gether of  fresh  water,  or  else  affording  it  at  the  El  Alto  alone  for  a 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  187 


United  States  v.  Soto  et  al. 


short  distance.  The  adjoining  rancho  at  the  south  is  bounded  by 
the  San  Lorenzo,  and  it  is  improbable  that  in  fixing  the  limits  of  a 
cattle  rancho  access  to  that  stream  should  have  been  denied  to 
Soto,  when  the  land  between  his  rancho  and  it  was  unoccupied  and 
ungrantcd,  and  the  Governor  was  wilhng  on  his  mere  suggestion  to 
increase  the  quantity  given  him  by  an  additional  half  league.  If 
with  these  considerations  in  our  minds  we  recur  to  the  grant,  its  in- 
tention seems  obvious.  It  does  not  profess  to  give  the  boundary 
lines  except  on  one  side  of  the  tract,  but  "  its  limits."  Its  longi- 
tudinal limits  are  declared  to  be  from  the  San  Lorenzo  to  the  Alto, 
and  the  rodeo  line  to  the  beach.  Having  thus  determined  its 
length,  the  grantor  indicates  its  breadth,  viz :  from  the  beach  to  the 
first  crest  of  the  hills. 

He  does  not  mention  any  point  in  the  crest  of  the  hills,  which 
would  have  been  natural  if  he  had  intended  to  fix  as  a  southern 
boundary  an  imaginary  straight  line  drawn  from  the  point  where 
the  rodeo  line  struck  the  beach  to  the  crest ;  and  the  indefiniteness 
of  this  description,  referring  as  it  does  to  a  line  on  the  summit  of  a 
range  of  hills,  rather  than  to  a  point  on  those  hills,  seems  to  show 
that  the  intention  of  the  grantor  was  merely  to  fix  the  latitudinal 
limits  of  the  tract,  viz :  the  beach  and  the  crest ;  rather  than  to  de- 
scribe a  line  as  a  precise  boundary. 

But  all  doubt  on  this  subject  is  removed,  if  the  disefio  produced 
be  received  as  the  original  on  which  the  grant  was  made.  It  is 
shown  beyond  any  reasonable  doubt,  that  it  was  with  the  other  title 
papers  placed  in  the  hands  of  eminent  counsel  in  this  city,  in  whose 
custody  it  has  ever  since  remained.  By  some  oversight  it  was  not 
put  in  evidence  before  the  Board,  but  A.  M.  Pico,  Francisco  Arce 
and  G.  Castro  testify  that  it  is  either  the  identical  map,  or  one  ex- 
actly resembling  that,  which  was  handed  to  Pico  when  about  to  give 
judicial  possession  to  Soto.  This  map  is  unusually  rude,  but  the 
form  of  the  tract  is  sufficiently  indicated  to  show  it  to  be  a  square 
or  parallelogram,  with  the  beach  as  its  western  boundary. 

A  further  confirmation  of  these  views  is  found  in  the  report  of 
Jimeno  at  the  time  of  the  dispute  between  the  Governor  and  Cas- 
tro. "It  appears  to  him,"  he  says  "  convenient  to  measure  to  Soto 
the  league,  more  or  less,  which  has  been  granted  him  from  the- 
13 


188  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Pico  V.  United  States. 

beach  to  the  '  lomas,'  or  hills,  but  always  on  the  side  of  the  arroyo 
del  Alto,  because  those  are  the  limits  which  have  been  marked  out, 
and  from  these  limits  he  should  follow  those  of  Don  G.  Castro." 

He  was  thus,  according  to  Jimeno,  to  have  a  league  on  the  side 
of  the  Alto,  from  the  beach  to  the  hill  and  from  the  Alto  to  the  San 
Lorenzo,  following  Castro's  boundary.  The  sobrante,  after  measur- 
ing the  league,  would  have  lain  between  the  beach  and  the  San 
Lorenzo,  and  would  have  been,  as  the  testimony  shows,  about  half 
a  league  in  extent  if  measured  after  the  Castro  line  was  determined, 
and  it  was  precisely  this  sobrante  of  half  a  league  which  Soto 
asked  for  and  obtained. 

If  to  all  this  be  added  the  fact  that  Soto  himself  always  claimed, 
and  was  regarded  by  his  neighbors  as  owning,  the  whole  tract  be- 
tween the  beach  and  the  Castro  hne,  and  between  the  Alto  and 
rodeo  Hne  and  the  San  Lorenzo,  the  conclusion  is  irresistible  that 
such  are  the  true  boundaries  of  the  grant. 

The  Board  confirmed  the  claim  to  the  land  within  these  bounda- 
ries, and  I  see  no  reason  to  reverse  their  decree. 


ANDRES  PICO,   CLAIMING  the    Rancho  Moquelamos,  Ap- 
pellant, vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

Under  the  ruling  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Fremont's  case,  this  claim  is  valid. 

Claim  for  eleven  leagues  of  land  in  Calaveras  county,  rejected  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimant. 

Stanly  &  King,  for  Appellant. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  is  founded  on  a  grant  made  by  Governor 
Pio  Pico,  June  6th,  1846,  and  which  was  approved  by  the  Depart- 
mental Assembly  June  fifteenth,  of  the  same  year.  The  genuine- 
ness of  the  grant,  and  of  the  certificate  of  approval,  is  testified  to 
by  N.  A.  Den.     No  attempt  has  been  made  to  contradict  or  im- 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  189 

Pico  V.  United  States. 

peach  him  ;  nor  is  any  doubt  suggested  as  to  the  authenticity  of 
the  papers.  A  document  is  also  produced  from  the  archives  pur- 
porting to  be  a  communication  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Assembly, 
transmitting  the  title  papers  to  the  Secretary  del  Despacho,  with 
the  approval  of  the  Assembly. 

The  claim  Avas  rejected  by  the  Board  for  want  of  proof  of  occu- 
pation and  cultivation.  Additional  testimony  has  been  taken  in 
this  Court,  from  which  it  appears  that  in  1848  the  grantee  had  some 
horses  upon  the  land,  and  took  possession  of  some  improvements 
made  upon  it  by  C.  M.  Weber. 

This  evidence  is  of  course  wholly  insufficient  to  show  a  fulfillment 
of  the  conditions.  But  if  the  grant  and  other  papers  be  regarded 
as  genuine,  (and  under  the  evidence  we  are  compelled  so  to  con- 
sider them)  the  grantee  obtained  a  full  and  complete  title  from  the 
former  Government.  The  failure  to  perform  conditions  subsequent, 
though  it  might  have  exposed  him  to  a  denouncement  of  the  land, 
did  not  until  such  a  proceeding  was  had,  forfeit  it ;  and  his  vested 
title  remained  unimpaired  up  to  the  change  of  sovereignty. 

But  even  if  in  the  case  of  a  complete  title  we  were  authorized  to 
declare  the  land  forfeited  where  the  grantee  had  so  unreasonably 
delayed  the  performance  of  the  conditions  as  to  justify  the  pre- 
sumption that  he  had  abandoned  his  land,  this  case  would  not  fall 
within  the  principle.  The  grant  was  issued  about  a  month  before 
the  American  flag  was  raised  in  this  country ;  the  disorder  inci- 
dental to  the  invasion  of  the  country  would  naturally  prevent  any 
settlement  in  remote  parts,  and  it  seems  unreasonable  to  say  that 
any  failure  to  perform  conditions  of  a  grant  issued  but  a  few  months 
before  the  Mexican  authority  was  finally  subverted,  justify  the  in- 
ference "  that  the  grantee  had  abandoned  his  land  during  the  ex- 
istence of  the  former  government,  and  is  now  seeking  to  resume  it 
from  its  enhanced  value.     (^U.  S.  v.  Fremont^  17  How.) 

The  land  granted  is  described  as  "  eleven  square  leagues,  bordering 
on  the  River  Moquelamos,  bordering  on  the  north  upon  the  southern 
shore  of  said  river,  on  the  east  upon  the  adjacent  ridge  of  moun- 
tains, on  the  south  upon  the  land  of  Mr.  Gulnac,  and  on  the  west 
by  the  extremes  of  the  shore."  There  would  seem  to  be  no  difficulty 
in  identifying  this  tract. 


190  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Pico  V.  United  States. 

This  case  was  submitted  many  months  ago,  without  argument  or 
observation  of  any  kind  on  either  side. 

It  was  rejected  by  the  Board  for  nonfulfillment  of  the  conditions. 
But  if  the  grant  be  really  genuine,  the  nonperformance  cannot, 
under  all  the  circumstances,  divest  the  title  which  the  claimant 
acquired  by  the  grant  of  the  Governor,  approved  by  the  Departs 
mental  Assembly. 

No  expediente  containing  the  usual  documents  (petition,  informes, 
order  of  concession,  diseno,  copy  of  the  grant,  etc.)  has  been  pro- 
duced. No  diseno  or  map  of  the  land  has  been  exhibited.  The 
only  paper  found  in  the  archives  is  the  communication  of  Botello, 
transmitting  the  title  with  the  approval  of  the  Departmental  As- 
sembly to  the  Secretary  del  Despacho,  before  alluded  to. 

The  production,  however,  of  the  original  title,  authenticated  by 
the  testimony  of  an  unimpeached  and  uncontradicted  witness,  leaves 
us  no  alternative  but  to  regard  it  as  genuine,  and  if  the  grant  was 
duly  made  and  approved,  the  title  to  the  land  passed  to  the  grantee. 

To  any  one  acquainted  with  the  facihty  and  unscrupulousness 
with  which,  in  this  class  of  cases,  frauds  have  been  perpetrated  and 
sustained  by  testimony  apparently  conclusive,  a  grant  unsupported 
either  by  evidence  from  the  archives,  or  by  proof  of  occupation  of 
the  land,  must  appear  suspicious.  But  even  in  such  cases  the 
Court  is  not  at  liberty  in  the  face  of  the  uncontradicted  testimony 
of  unimpeached  witnesses  to  substitute  its  own  suspicions  for  proofs. 
In  the  case  at  bar,  however,  a  document  is  found  in  the  archives, 
which  affords  the  best  if  not  the  only  moral  evidence  of  the  genuine- 
ness of  the  grant. 

Under  the  proofs  in  this  case,  we  do  not  feel  warranted  in  pro- 
nouncing the  title  to  be  spurious  and  rejecting  the  claim. 

A  decree  of  confirmation  must  therefore  be  entered. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  191 

Nunez  V.  United  States. 

SEBASTIAN  NUNEZ,  claiming  the  Rancho  Okestimba,  Ap- 
pellant, vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

This  claim  is  valid  under  the  ruling  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Fremont's  case. 

Claim  for  six  leagues  of  land  in  Tuolumne  county,  rejected  bj 
the  Board,  and  appealed  bj  claimant. 

Stanly  &  King,  for  Appellant. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  was  rejected  by  the  Board, 

The  grant  was  issued  on  the  twenty-second  of  February,  1844  ; 
but  no  approval  of  the  Departmental  Assembly  was  obtained,  nor 
was  juridical  possession  given. 

The  authenticity  of  the  grant  seems  sufficiently  established.  The 
original  document  is  produced,  and  the  expediente  is  found  in  the 
archives  of  the  former  Government.  The  confirmation  of  the  claim 
is,  however,  opposed  by  the  United  States  on  the  ground  that  the 
claimant,  from  the  date  of  his  grant  until  long  after  the  acquisition 
of  the  country,  neglected  to  comply  with  any  of  the  conditions. 

The  grant  was  issued,  as  has  been  stated,  in  1844.  It  clearly 
appears  that  from  that  time  until  about  the  year  1850,  two  years 
after  the  acquisition  of  the  country,  the  claimant  neither  occupied, 
cultivated  or  took  possession  of  the  land  conceded.  No  effort  what- 
soever on  his  part  to  perform  the  conditions  appears  to  have  been 
made,  and  the  only  explanation  of  the  delay  to  be  found  in  the  evi- 
dence submitted  to  the  Board,  is  contained  in  a  single  sentence  of 
the  deposition  of  Francisco  Perez  Pacheco,  to  the  effect  that  there 
was  no  security  in  putting  cattle  on  the  rancho  for  several  years 
after  the  grant. 

The  testimony  of  Jacinto  Rodriguez  and  Benito  Diaz  has  been 
taken  in  this  Court,  and  is  chiefly  relied  on  as  affording  the  neces- 
sary explanation  of  the  omission  of  the  claimant  to  fulfill  the  condi- 
tions.    But  their  evidence  is  not  very  satisfactory. 

The  first  of  these  witnesses  states  that  he  cannot  tell  certainly 
when  the  first  settlement  was  made,  but  the  land  was  taken  posses- 


192  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Nunez  v.  United  States. 

sion  of  as  soon  as  it  was  safe  to  do  so  on  account  of  the  savage  state 
of  the  wild  Indians.  In  reply  to  an  inquiry  as  to  his  means  of 
knowing  these  facts,  he  states  that  he  used  to  go  there  to  catch 
wild  horses,  and  also  as  a  soldier  to  pursue  the  Indians. 

Benito  Diaz  testifies  in  nearly  the  same  terms,  that  he  does 
not  know  exactly  when  the  first  settlement  was  made,  but  that  he 
knows  possession  was  taken  as  soon  as  the  wild  state  of  the  savage 
Indians  permitted,  and  that  the  hostihty  of  the  Indians  prevented 
possession  from  being  taken.  He  adds  that  he  knows  these  facts, 
because  he  was  mining  in  the  neighborhood,  and  frequently  passed 
there  ;  that  he  is  forty-one  years  of  age,  and  has  lived  in  that 
neighborhood  many  years. 

If  by  mining  the  witness  means  gold  mining,  then  his  knowledge 
of  the  country  derived  from  that  occupation  could  not  have  been 
extended  further  back  than  1848  or  1849.  But  if  he  means  some 
other  kind  of  mining  carried  on  before  the  conquest  of  the  country, 
it  is  not  explained  why  the  claimant  could  not  have  cultivated  his 
rancho  with  as  much  security  as  the  witness  carried  on  his  own 
business  of  mining.  If  he  has,  as  he  states,  resided  many  years  in 
the  vicinity,  that  fact  would  seem  to  show  that  the  claimant  might 
have  done  the  like. 

But  another  witness  was  produced  before  the  Board  whose  testi- 
mony, however,  is  not  alluded  to  in  their  opinion  ;  probably  for  the 
reason  that  it  was  considered  unworthy  of  credit. 

Francisco  Perez  Pacheco  testifies  that  the  land  has  been  occupied 
by  the  present  claimant  "  for  about  two  years.  The  deposition 
bears  date  May  4th,  1852.  He  also  says  that  a  house  and  corral 
have  been  on  the  land  between  two  and  three  years.  This  witness 
is  a  colindante,  and  one  to  whom  the  Governor  referred  for  informa- 
tion, and  on  whose  report  the  grant  was  made.  His  means  of 
knowledge  must  therefore  have  been  as  good  as  those  of  any  other 
psrson. 

Jose  Abrego,  however,  ignorant  apparently  of  the  previous  testi- 
mony of  Pacheco,  and  with  a  zeal  somewhat  outstripping  his  dis- 
cretion, does  not  hesitate  to  swear  (March  3d,  1853)  that  "  during 
the  last  eight  years  the  land  has  been  in  the  possession  and  occu- 
pation of  the  claimant ;  that  he  has  used  it  principally  for  grazing 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  193 

Nunez  v.  United  States. 

purposes  ;  constructed  and  occupied  several  small  houses  by  himself 
and  those  in  his  employment ;  has  constructed  several  large  corrals 
for  the  herding  of  cattle,  and  has  cultivated  portions  of  the  land 
during  all  that  timey  This  witness  does  not  seem  to  have  been 
aware  that  the  theory  of  the  case  on  the  part  of  the  claimant  was, 
not  that  he  had  shortly  after  his  grant  occupied,  cultivated  and 
stocked  his  rancho,  and  fully  performed  all  the  conditions,  but  that 
he  had  been  prevented  from  doing  so  by  Indian  hostilities.  Nor 
does  he  appear  to  have  considered  that  the  Court  would  be  slow  to 
beheve  that  such  extensive  improvements  could  have  been  made, 
and  the  rancho  stocked  with  cattle,  rendering  necessary  the  con- 
struction of  ''  several  large  corrals,"  and  the  fact  remain  entirely 
unknown  to  the  nearest  neighbor  of  so  enterprising  a  ranchero.  The 
testimony  of  this  witness  suggests  a  painful  doubt  as  to  the  reliability 
of  much  of  the  evidence  taken  in  this  class  of  cases,  and  perhaps 
justifies  a  regret  that  we  are  not  authorized  to  exact  in  every  in- 
stance evidence  of  occupation  and  cultivation  under  the  former 
Government  as  the  best,  if  not  the  only  check  upon  forgeries  and 
frauds,  in  cases  where  the  archives  contain  no  evidence  of  the  grant. 
•  Rejecting  then  the  testimony  of  this  witness  as  wholly  unworthy 
of  credit,  the  question  recurs — has  the  claim  been  forfeited  by  neg- 
lect to  perform  the  conditions  ? 

Under  the  view  formerly  taken  by  this  Court,  the  grant  of  the 
Governor,  issued  before  the  approbation  of  the  Assembly  was  ob- 
tained, was  regarded  as  inchoate  or  imperfect,  and  as  conveying  of 
itself  no  title  to  the  land.  It  was  considered,  however,  that  while 
the  grantee  had,  on  the  faith  of  this  imperfect  title,  fulfilled  the 
conditions,  and  thus  rendered  to  the  Government  the  only  consider- 
ation for  the  grant  exacted  by  their  laws  or  pohcy,  he  had,  on 
showing  that  fact  or  a  performance  cy-pres,  or  perhaps  even  an 
effort  to  perform,  which  had  been  frustrated  by  unforeseen  obstacles, 
an  equitable  right  to  a  confirmation. 

It  was  not  supposed  by  this  Court  that  if  by  the  grant  an  estate 
vested  in  the  grantee,  that  that  estate  could  be  divested  unless  by 
a  proceeding  by  way  of  denouncement  under  the  former  Govern- 
ment. It  was  considered,  as  observed  by  the  Supreme  Court  in 
The  United  States  v.  Fremont^  "  that  the  grant  subjects  the  lands 


194  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Nunez  v.  United  States. 

to  be  denounced  bj  another,  but  that  the  conditions  do  not  declare 
the  land  forfeited  to  the  State  on  the  failure  of  the  grantee  to  per- 
form them."  When,  therefore,  no  denouncement  had  taken  place, 
it  was  not  deemed  competent  for  this  Court  to  inquire  into  and  de- 
clare forfeitures  which  might  have  accrued  under  the  Mexican 
Government. 

It  was  also  considered  by  this  Court  that,  inasmuch  as  the  As- 
sembly and  Supreme  Government  had  the  right,  at  their  discretion, 
to  annul  the  grant,  our  Government  had  succeeded  to  that  right ; 
and  was  at  liberty  to  exercise  it  unless  under  circumstances  which 
would  have  made  it  inequitable  in  the  former  Government  to  have 
done  so.  If  then,  so  radical  a  change  as  that  which  has  since  oc- 
curred had  taken  place  in  the  value  of  the  land,  the  condition  of 
the  country,  and  the  policy  and  even  duty  of  the  Government,  the 
Mexican  authorities  would  clearly  have  been  justified  in  withholding 
their  approval,  unless  by  the  settlement  and  occupation  of  the  land, 
on  the  faith  of  the  grant,  they  had  already  received  the  considera- 
tion for  it.  The  equitable  obligations  which  were  binding  on  them, 
are  binding  on  us,  but  none  others,  and  the  substantial  equity  of 
the  claimant  was  supposed  to  consist  in  the  fact  that  he  had  re*- 
ceived  an  imperfect  or  inchoate  title,  and  had  performed  the  condi- 
tions during  the  existence  of  the  former  Government. 

Where,  however,  the  grant  was  rendered  complete  by  the  ap- 
proval of  the  Assembly,  and  the  title  of  the  Mexican  nation  had 
been  finally  divested,  it  was  not  considered  that  we  could  inquire 
into  previous  forfeitures,  unless  such  as  had  been  taken  advantage 
of  and  declared  by  the  former  Government. 

It  is  decided,  however,  by  the  Supreme  Court,  that  by  an  un- 
approved grant  a  right  or  interest  vested  in  the  grantee,  which 
remained  in  him  unless  forfeited  or  divested  under  the  former 
Government. 

Such  forfeiture  did  not,  however,  accrue  on  those  cases  alone 
where  a  denouncement  of  the  land  was  made.  It  also  took  place, 
and  must  be  declared  by  this  Court,  wherever  there  has  been  un- 
reasonable delay  in  performing  the  conditions,  and  such  as  to 
authorize  the  presumption  of  abandonment. 

What  delay  is  to  be  considered  unreasonable,  and  as  giving  rise 


DECEMBER  TERM,  185G.  195 

Nunez  v.  United  States. 

to  this  presumption,  the  Court  does  not  expHcitly  state  ;  nor  does  it 
perhaps  admit  of  precise  definition.  It  would  seem  more  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  generous  and  benignant  spirit  with  which  the 
Supreme  Court  has  viewed  these  cases,  to  hold  that  no  delay  shall 
be  considered  so  unreasonable  as  to  forfeit  the  land,  unless  such  as 
would  not  have  been  excused  by  the  former  Government  if  the  land 
had  been  denounced.  The  time  assigned  for  the  performance  of 
the  conditions  was  usually  one  year.  But  this  rested  wholly  in  the 
discretion  of  the  Governor.  By  the  usage  of  the  country  the  ex- 
cuses of  the  grantee  for  nonperformance  w^ere  indulgently  received, 
and  even  when  the  land  was  denounced  as  vacant  a  further  time  to 
fulfill  the  conditions  w^as  usually  allowed,  if  the  Government  was 
satisfied  that  the  grantee  intended  to  occupy  his  land  and  had  been 
unexpectedly  prevented. 

The  delay  which  the  Supreme  Court  regarded  as  working  a 
forfeiture  of  the  vested  interest  of  the  grantee,  is  evidently  some- 
thing more  than  such  as  would  constitute  a  technical  breach  of  the 
conditions.  It  must  be  such  "  unreasonable  "  delay  as  justifies  the 
belief  that  in  point  of  fact  the  grantee  voluntarily  abandoned  his 
land. 

But  such  an  inference  could  hardly  be  drawn,  unless  his  negli- 
gence was  protracted  and  susceptible  of  no  other  explanation,  or 
unless  he  had  left  the  country,  or  obtained  and  settled  upon  some 
other  grant,  or  had  by  some  other  unequivocal  act  or  omission 
clearly  indicated  his  intention  to  renounce  and  surrender  his 
property. 

When,  therefore,  the  Court  is  called  upon  to  declare  that  a 
grantee  of  land  has  voluntarily  abandoned  the  rights  he  is  admitted 
to  have  acquired,  the  question  is  not  unattended  with  difficulty  ; 
and  perhaps  the  test  already  suggested  may  be  found  as  safe  as  any 
other,  viz  :  that  he  shall  be  deemed  to  have  forfeited  his  lands  only 
under  such  circumstances  as  would,  under  the  laws  and  usages, 
have  deprived  him  of  it  had  it  been  denounced  by  another. 

In  the  case  at  bar  the  grant  was  made  in  1844.  The  grantee 
had,  therefore,  only  two  years  and  some  months  during  the  ex- 
istence of  the  former  Government,  within  which  to  perform  the  con- 
ditions.    The  political  and  other  disturbances,  which  were  reviewed 


196  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Nunez  v.  United  States. 

by  the  Supreme  Court  in  Fremont's  case,  as  excusing  or  account- 
ing for  Alvarado's  neglect  to  perform,  must  have  presented  equal 
obstacles  to  the  grantee  in  this  case  ;  and  the  hostility  of  the  Indians 
in  this  case  as  in  that,  probably,  though  the  fact  is  not  very  satis- 
factorily shown,  increased  the  difficulty  of  efiecting  a  settlement. 

It  is  true  that  others  appear  to  have  settled  upon  neighboring 
ranches.  For  the  grant  is  bounded  by  the  ranches  of  two  cohn- 
dantes,  and  Francisco  Perez  Pacheco,  by  the  informe  and  his  own  de- 
position, is  shown  to  have  had  a  rancho  in  the  vicinity.  But  a  settle- 
ment might  have  been  practicable  to  a  wealthy  man  with  numerous 
dependents,  while  a  poor  man  might  have  found  it  impossible  to  oc- 
cupy alone  an  extensive  tract,  separated  from  his  nearest  neighbor 
by  a  distance  of  several  leagues. 

I  am  inclined  to  think  that  if,  under  the  circumstances  of  this 
case,  the  land  had  been  denounced,  the  Mexican  authorities  would, 
under  their  laws  and  customs,  have  accepted  the  excuses  of  the 
grantee,  and  allowed  him  a  "  proroga  "  or  extension  of  time  ;  and 
the  fact  that  no  denouncement  was  made  is  of  some  weight,  as 
showing  that  no  one  else  offered  or  found  it  practicable  to  fulfill  the 
conditions. 

I  have  felt  much  hesitation  and  difficulty  in  arriving  at  a  con- 
clusion in  this  case. 

But  assuming  as  I  am  bound  to  do  that  the  grantee  acquired  a 
vested  interest  by  his  grant,  I  have  not  felt  authorized  to  say  that 
the  circumstances  show  that  he  voluntarily  abandoned  or  sur- 
rendered his  rights  during  the  existence  of  the  former  Government. 

What  circumstances  the  Supreme  Court  may  hereafter  regard 
as  authorizing  the  presumption  of  abandonment,  we  cannot  now  say. 
But  it  has  seemed  to  me  that  they  should  be  strong  and  unequivo- 
cal before  we  can  declare  that  a  right  of  property  once  vested  in  a 
grantee  of  the  former  Government  has  been  forfeited  or  lost  by  an 
abandonment  of  it. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  117 

United  States  v.  Rose  et  al. 

THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  JOHN  ROSE   et 

al.,  CLAIMING   THE   RaNCHO    DE   YuBA. 

The  validity  of  claims  under  the  Sutter  General  Title  affirmed  in  Hensley's  case 
No.  33. 

Claim  for  six  leagues  of  land  in  Yuba  county,  confirmed  by  the 
Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Thornton  &  Williams,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  is  founded  on  what  is  known  as  the  "  gen- 
eral title  "  of  Micheltorena.  It  has  already,  after  full  consideration, 
been  determined  in  this  Court  that  that  grant  w^as  sufficient  to  con- 
vey a  valid  title  to  those  in  whose  favor  it  issued.  The  only  points 
now  open  to  controversy  in  this  case  are  therefore  :  1.  Whether 
the  alleged  grantee  was  one  of  those  persons  for  whose  benefit  the 
grant  was  made.  2.  Has  the  right  (if  any)  acquired  by  him  been 
forfeited  by  such  unreasonable  neglect  to  perform  the  conditions  of 
occupation  and  cultivation  as  to  authorize  the  presumption  that  he 
had  abandoned  his  land. 

1st.  Was  he  one  of  the  grantees  under  the  original  title. 

The  grant  of  Micheltorena  bears  date  Dec.  22d,  1844.  It 
recites,  "  that  the  Supreme  Government  not  being  able,  on  account 
of  other  occupations,  to  extend  one  by  one  the  respective  titles  to  all 
the  citizens  who  have  petitioned  for  lands  with  favorable  reports 
from  Seiior  Don  A.  Sutter,  by  these  letters  grants  unto  them  and 
their  families  the  lands  described  in  their  petitions  and  diseilos  to 
all  and  each  one  who  has  obtained  the  favorable  report  of  Sefior 
Sutter,  without  any  one  being  able  to  question  their  ownership ; 
a  copy  of  this  given  to  them  hereafter  by  Senor  Sutter  serving 
them  as  a  formal  title,  with  which  they  shall  present  themselves  to 
this  Government  for  the  purpose  of  delivering  to  them  the  title  in 
due  form  and  upon  paper  of  the  corresponding  seal.  And  for  the 
testimony  thereof  at  all  times,  I  give  this  present  document,  which 


198  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT 


United  States  v.  Rose  et  al. 


shall  be  acknowledged  and  respected  bj  all  the  civil  and  military 
authorities  of  the  Mexican  nation  in  this  and  all  other  departments. 
(Signed.)  '*  Micheltorena." 

It  having  been  decided  that  this  grant  passed  a  title  to  the  per- 
sons therein  referred  as  fully  and  effectually  as  if  they  had  indi- 
vidually been  named  in  it  or  had  received  their  separate  titles,  the 
only  question  that  remains  is,  was  the  claimant  one  of  those  who  had 
petitioned  the  Government,  and  had  obtained  a  favorable  report  from 
Senor  Sutter  ?  Of  this,  the  most  satisfactory  evidence  w^ould  un- 
doubtedly be  the  production  of  a  copy  of  the  grant  dehvered  to 
him  by  Sutter  in  obedience  to  the  direction  contained  in  it.  But 
this,  though  perhaps  the  best,  is  not  the  only  evidence  which  could 
establish  the  fact  that  the  claimant  was  one  of  the  intended  grantees. 
If  he  could  show  that  he  had  petitioned  for  the  land,  and  that  he 
had  obtained  the  favorable  report  of  General  Sutter,  it  would 
clearly  be  enough  to  establish  his  right  under  the  grant,  even  though 
Sutter  may  have  neglected  or  refused  to  give  him  the  evidence  of 
his  title  which  he  was  directed  to  furnish.  The  fact,  however,  that 
such  a  copy  was  not  delivered  to  the  party,  would  be  a  circumstance 
requiring  explanation  ;  for  it  has  not,  as  yet,  been  suggested  to  this 
Court  that  Sutter  neglected  or  refused  to  comply  with  the  directions 
of  the  general  title  in  this  respect,  when  applied  to  hy  any  one 
entitled  under  it. 

In  the  case  at  bar,  it  is  alleged  that  a  copy  of  the  title  was  duly 
given  to  the  grantee  ;  that  it,  wdth  other  papers,  was  lost  by  him 
while  fording  the  Sacramento  river  ;  that  on  being  made  acquainted 
with  the  loss,  Captain  Sutter  furnished  a  second  copy,  which  was 
sent  by  the  grantee  to  Monterey  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  the 
approval  of  the  Assembly,  but  that  he  has  never  been  able  to  re- 
cover it,  or  to  discover  what  had  been  done  w^ith  it. 

General  Sutter,  who  was  sworn  on  the  part  of  the  claimants, 
testified  that  John  Smith  petitioned  the  Governor  for  six  square 
leagues  of  land,  accompanying  his  petition  by  a  map  drawn,  as  he 
understood,  by  John  Bidwell.  The  expediente  with  the  usual 
decree  for  information  was  acted  upon  by  the  witness,  and  a  favor- 
able report  made  before  the  twenty-second  of  December,  1844. 
The  witness  also  stated  that  he  remembered  having  given  to  Smith 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  199 

United  States  v.  Eosc  ct  al. 

a  copy  of  the  original  title,  as  he  was  entitled  to  have  it ;  that  sub- 
sequently he  was  informed  and  fully  satisfied  that  in  the  spring  of 
1845,  Smith  lost  all  his  documentary  evidence  or  expediente  in  thi^ 
case. 

On  his  cross-examination  he  stated  that  after  the  petition  came 
back  from  Monterey  for  his  report  he  examined  it  in  the  presence 
of  Bidwell,  who  wrote  it,  and  of  Smith,  the  grantee. 

Major  Bidwell  confirms  the  testimony  of  General  Sutter,  and 
states  that  he  saw  the  latter  deliver  a  copy  of  the  general  title  to 
Smith  ;  and  that  subsequently  he  prepared  a  petition  to  General 
Sutter,  soliciting  another  copy  of  the  general  title,  as  the  first  had 
been  lost  with  the  accompanying  documents  ;  and  that  General 
Sutter  knowing  that  fact,  delivered  a  second  copy  as  requested. 
The  witness  also  states  that  the  land  claimed  in  this  case  was 
granted  to  Smith  by  the  general  title  referred  to  ;  and  he  identifies 
a  map  as  made  by  himself  in  1844,  on  which  the  land  now  claimed 
is  marked  as  the  "  Rancho  de  Yuba." 

General  Sutter  was  reexamined  in  this  Court.  His  recollection 
when  making  his  last  deposition  seems  more  uncertain  and  confused 
than  when  his  testimony  was  first  taken.  He  repeats,  however,  his 
former  statement  as  to  the  facts  we  are  considering,  viz  :  that  Smith 
applied  for  the  land  ;  that  the  petition  was  referred  to  him  ;  that 
he  reported  favorably  upon  it ;  that  he  delivered  a  copy  of  the  gen- 
eral title  to  Smith  ;  and  that  on  its  being  proved  to  him  "  by  many 
persons  "  that  the  first  copy  was  lost,  he  gave  or  sent  to  Smith  a 
second  copy. 

When  asked  how  the  loss  was  proved,  he  replied :  "  When  a 
man  like  Bidwell  told  me  anything,  I  believed  it  like  the  Gospel." 

There  can,  I  think,  be  no  room  for  doubt  under  this  testimony 
that  Smith  was  one  of  those  in  whose  favor  the  general  title  issued. 
His  own  testimony  has  been  taken  to  prove  the  loss  of  the  copy 
dehvered  to  him  and  of  the  other  documents.  It  is  objected  that 
it  has  since  appeared  that  he  has  or  pretends  to  some  interest  in 
the  land,  notwithstanding  his  conveyance  to  the  present  claimants. 
A  bill  of  complaint  is  exhibited  in  which  he  prays  that  that  sale  may 
be  set  aside  on  the  ground  of  fraud.  The  objection  was  not  taken, 
however,  at  the  time  he  testified,  and  besides,  his  own  evidence  as 


200  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Rose  et  al. 

to  the  loss  of  the  documents  would  clearly  be  admissible,  notwith- 
standing his  interest. 

His  account  is  corroborated  by  the  testimony  of  Sutter  and 
Bidwell — witnesses  of  whom  it  may  be  observed  that  they  are  of  a 
class,  unfortunately  too  small,  upon  whose  veracity  this  Court  can 
place  rehance. 

It  is  not  to  be  forgotten  that  the  production  of  the  copy  of  the 
general  title  is  only  important  as  showing  that  the  party  producing 
it  was  one  of  those  intended  to  be  benoiioud  by  the  original.  The 
interest  passed  by  virtue  of  the  original ;  and  it  passed  to  those 
persons  who  are  referred  to  in  it,  though  they  are  not  named. 

The  only  inquiry  therefore  is,  was  the  claimant  one  of  those  per- 
sons ?  To  estabhsh  this,  no  secondary  evidence  of  the  contents  of 
the  copy  delivered  to  him  is  necessary.  It  is  ih.Qfact  that  he  was 
one  of  those  in  whose  favor  Sutter  had  reported  which  fixes  his 
rights,  and  identifies  him  as  one  of  the  intended  grantees. 

That  he  did  petition  for  the  land  ;  that  Sutter  reported  favor- 
ably on  his  petition  ;  that  a  copy  of  the  original  grant  was  given  to 
him  at  the  time,  as  one  of  the  grantees,  is  clearly  proved.  His 
rights  are,  therefore,  established,  whatever  may  have  become  of  the 
copy  delivered  to  him — that  copy  being  in  no  sense  the  instrument 
which  conveyed  the  title,  but  only  a  means  of  showing  by  its  pro- 
duction what  other  testimony  has  sufficiently  proved. 

But  in  order  to  ascertain  what  lands  were  granted,  reference 
must  be  had  to  his  petition  ;  for  it  was  the  tract  therein  solicited 
which  the  Governor  granted,  and  secondary  evidence  of  the  con- 
tents of  the  petition  must,  of  course,  in  the  absence  of  the  original, 
be  resorted  to. 

That  the  petition  and  accompanying  documents  were  lost  is,  I 
think,  sufficiently  shown,  not  only  by  Smith's  own  testimony,  but 
by  that  of  Sutter  and  Bidwell,  and  still  more  conclusively  by  the 
fact  that  a  second  copy  of  the  grant  was  delivered  to  the  grantee — 
a  proceeding  absurd  and  without  a  motive,  unless  the  first  had  been 
lost.  It  is  suggested  that  due  diligence  has  not  been  shown  to 
obtain  this  second  copy.  But  the  only  document  as  to  which 
secondary  evidence  is  important  is  the  petition,  and  of  this  it  does 
not  appear  that  any  copy  was  made. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  201 

Uuitcd  States  v.  Rose  et  al. 

The  petition  not  being  produced,  the  fact  that  the  land  now 
claimed  was  that  solicited  in  it  must  be  estabhshed  bj  other  testi- 
mony. 

Major  Bid  well  testifies  that  he  is  well  acquainted  with  the  land, 
and  he  states  its  boundaries,  and  that  it  was  granted  to  Smith  by 
Micheltorena.  A  map  is  also  identified  by  him  as  made  by  himself 
in  1844,  on  which  the  land  now  claimed  is  deUneated  under  the 
name  of  "  Rancho  de  Yuba." 

General  Sutter  testifies  that  John  Smith  petitioned  Governor 
Micheltorena  for  six  leagues  of  land,  accompanying  his  petition  with 
a  map  or  disefio,  drawn,  as  witness  understood,  by  Major  Bidwell. 
Smith  (the  witness  says)  was  in  possession  by  his  authority  of  this 
land — the  boundaries  of  which  correspond  with  the  map  referred 
to  in  the  deposition  of  Bidwell.  The  witness  on  his  cross-examina- 
tion says  that  he  examined  the  original  diseno  when  the  expediente 
was  referred  to  him  for  his  "  informe ;  "  that  he  was  well  acquainted 
with  the  ground,  and  that  the  boundaries  as  testified  to  by  Major 
Bidwell,  and  delineated  on  the  map  referred  to  by  him,  correspond 
with  those  on  the  diseiio  which  accompanied  the  petition. 

When  subsequently  examined,  the  witness  declared  his  inability 
to  specify  the  boundaries  of  the  land  petitioned  for,  or  to  give  a 
particular  description  of  the  diseno  which  accompanied  the  petition. 
He  even  states  that  he  cannot  recollect  the  quantity  of  land  apphed 
for  by  Smith. 

It  is  not  very  easy  to  reconcile  the  accurate  recollection  exhibited 
in  the  first  deposition  of  General  Sutter  with  the  confusion  and  for- 
getfulness  shown  in  his  last.  Perhaps  the  lapse  of  time  may  in 
some  degree  have  impaired  his  memory,  though  it  is  strange  that 
two  years  should  have  so  completely  obliterated  the  recollection  of 
events  which  in  1855  he  so  freshly  remembered. 

If  we  were  compelled  to  rely  upon  General  Sutter's  testimony 
alone  to  ascertain  the  land  which  Smith  petitioned  for,  and  which 
was  granted  to  him,  we  should,  perhaps,  be  obhged  to  reject  the 
claim. 

The  testimony  of  Bidwell,  however,  is  explicit,  and  identifies  the 
land  granted  to  Smith. 

Smith  himself  swears  that  he  petitioned  for  and  obtained  the 


202  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Rose  et  al. 


Rancho  de  Yuba  ;  and  that  he  clahned  to  own  it  is  evident  from 
the  testimony  introduced  on  the  part  of  the  United  States ;  for  in 
1848,  he  sold  out  to  Nje  and  Foster,  from  whom  the  claimants 
derive  title,  his  interest  in  the  land  now  in  controversy.  The  fact 
that  so  soon  after  the  acquisition  of  the  country  he  claimed  to  own 
this  land  under  the  title  derived  from  Micheltorena,  shows  that  the 
claim  now  urged  is  no  recent  invention,  and  corroborates  the  testi- 
mony of  Sutter  and  Bidwell  that  the  tract  now  claimed  was  that 
originally  petitioned  for  and  granted  to  him. 

Upon  the  whole,  I  think  it  sufficiently  proved,  not  only  that  Smith 
was  one  of  the  intended  grantees  under  the  general  title,  but  that 
the  land  petitioned  for  by  him,  and  by  that  instrument  granted,  was 
the  Rancho  de  Yuba  claimed  in  this  suit. 

The  next  inquiry  is,  was  the  vested  interest  so  acquired  forfeited 
during  the  existence  of  the  former  Government  by  such  unreason- 
able neglect  to,  perform  the  conditions  as  to  justify  the  presumption 
that  the  grantee  had  abandoned  his  grant. 

The  evidence  shows  that  before  obtaining  his  grant.  Smith  had 
purchased  from  General  Sutter  one  league  of  land,  and  had  built  a 
house  upon  it.  The  land  he  solicited  immediately  adjoined  this 
tract,  and  it  would  seem  from  the  proofs,  that  the  second  house 
built  by  Smith  was  also  within  the  limits  of  his  purchase,  and  not 
within  those  of  his  grant.  This  is  certainly  the  case  if  the  bound- 
aries of  Sutter's  grant  be  located  according  to  the  preHminary 
survey  made  of  it. 

It  may  be  admitted,  therefore,  that  Smith  never  built  a  house 
within  the  hmits  of  the  six  leagues  granted ;  but  that  he  resided 
in  a  house  built  on  the  land  purchased  by  him  which  immediately 
adjoined  it.  His  cattle,  however,  ranged  over  the  large  tract,  and 
he  appears  to  have  claimed  and  been  recognized  as  possessing  both 
tracts,  until  1848,  when  he  sold  out  to  Nye  and  Foster. 

It  seems  to  me  that  this  occupation  'was  sufficient  to  satisfy  the 
Mexican  law.  When  a  sobrante  or  surplus  was  granted  to  one  who 
had  previously  obtained  a  grant  of  a  portion  of  the  land  inclosed 
within  natural  boundaries,  it  was  not  expected  that  he  should  build 
a  second  house  and  reside  on  both  tracts  at  once.  So  also  where 
an   augmentation  or   additional   grant  was   made,  the  additional 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  203 

United  States  v.  Rose  ct  al. 

an  augmentation  or  additional  grant  was  made,  the  additional 
quantity  was  added  to  that  first  granted,  and  both  formed  one 
whole . 

If  Smith  then  was  residing  and  had  built  a  house  upon  the  one 
league  purchased,  and  subsequently  obtained  from  the  Government 
an  additional  six  leagues  immediately  adjoining  it,  he  must  be  con- 
sidered from  that  time  as  occupying  the  whole  seven  leagues,  or  the 
whole  tract,  upon  a  portion  of  which  he  continued  to  reside. 

Certainly,  such  an  occupation  repels  all  idea  that  he  had  aban- 
doned his  grant.  And  it  is  only  when  the  neglect  to  fulfill  the 
conditions  has  been  so  unreasonable  as  to  justify  the  presumption  of 
abandonment,  that  we  are  authorized,  under  the  principles  laid  down 
by  the  Supreme  Court,  to  declare  his  claim  forfeited. 

It  is  further  objected  that  the  general  title  only  grants  to  those 
citizens  who  have  obtained  the  favorable  report  of  General  Sutter 
the  lands  sohcited  by  them  respectively ;  and  that  it  is  not  shown 
that  Smith  was  a  citizen. 

It  appears  that  Smith  is  a  native  of  Canada  or  New  Brunswick  ; 
that  he  came  to  this  country  in  1835. 

He  swears  himself  that  he  was  naturalized,  but  he  does  not  pro- 
duce his  papers  or  give  secondary  evidence  of  their  contents. 
They  were  lost  with  the  other  documents.  It  appears,  however, 
that  General  Sutter  delivered  to  him  a  copy  of  the  title  as  one  of 
those  referred  to  in  it.  General  Sutter  was  at  that  time  Military 
Commandant  of  the  Frontier,  and  exercised  civil  jurisdiction  in  that 
portion  of  Upper  California.  He  was  directed  to  deliver  a  copy  of 
the  title  to  a  certain  class  of  persons  described  in  it.  It  is  to  be 
presumed  that  as  an  officer  of  the  Government  he  did  his  duty,  and 
acted  within  the  limits  of  his  authority.  The  fact,  therefore,  that 
Smith  was  recognized  by  him  as  one  of  those  entitled  to  receive  a 
copy  of  the  grant,  and  that  he  delivered  a  copy  to  him  as  such, 
should,  when  corroborated  by  the  oath  of  Smith  himself,  be  received 
as  sufficient  to  bring  him  within  the  class  of  persons  in  whose  favor 
the  grant  issued. 

The  claim  was  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  I  see  no  reason  to 
reverse  their  decision. 
14 


204  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Uuiled  States  v.  Heirs  of  Estudillo. 

THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  THE  HEIRS  OF 
JOSE  JOAQUIN  ESTUDILLO,  claiming  the  Rancho 
San  Leandro. 

Where  the  description  contained  in  a  grant,  and  tlie  circumstances  of  the  case, 
justify  the  belief  that  tlie  intention  was  to  grant  all  the  land  included  within 
the  boundaries  named,  then  the  words  "poco  mas  6  menos  "  (a  little  more  or 
less)  must  be  construed  as  operative  to  pass  to  the  grantee  such  fractional 
part  of  a  league  as  may  be  found  in  excess  of  the  quantity  named  in  the  grant. 

Claim  for  one  league  of  land  in  Alameda  county,  confirmed  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Thornton  &  Williams,  for  Appellees. 

This  claim  was  confirmed  by  the  Board.  It  has  recently  under- 
gone so  full  an  examination  in  the  ejectment  suit  brought  in  the 
Circuit  Court,  that  I  conceive  it  unnecessary  to  consider  at  length 
the  testimony  by  which  its  genuineness  is  established.  On  the 
whole,  after  an  attentive  consideration  of  the  additional  testimony 
taken  in  this  court,  I  incline  to  the  belief  that  the  grant  issued  as 
alleged  by  the  claimant,  although  the  nonproduction  of  the  original 
grant  and  the  fact  that  the  order  of  concession  is  unsigned,  leaves 
some  room  for  doubt  on  this  point. 

It  appears  to  me  evident  that  the  grantor  nitended  to  fix  as  the 
limits  of  the  tract,  the  San  Leandro,  the  sea  and  the  diramaderos  or 
overflowings  of  the  springs.  On  the  fourth  side  the  boundary  is 
designated  as  "  a  straight  line  from  the  diramaderos  to  the  San  Lo- 
renzo, but  so  drawn  as  not  to  include  the  Indian  cultivations." 
This  hne  was,  from  the  terms  of  the  grant,  to  be  a  straight  line, 
and  should  be  drawn  to  the  nearest  point  of  the  San^  Lorenzo  to 
which  it  can  be  drawn  without  including  the  Indian  cultivations ; 
whether  that  line  will  thus  take  a  southerly  or  a  south-westerly 
direction  will  depend  upon  the  extent  of  the  Indian  cultivations. 
Such  has  seemed  to  me,  after  much  consideration,  the  true  con- 
struction of  the  £>;rant  and  disciio  in  this  case,  and  such  was  the 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  205 

United  States  v.  Heirrf  of  Estudillo. 

view  taken  of  it  by  the  Circuit  Court  and  by  the  Board  of  Com- 
missioners. 

But  the  difficult  question  in  the  case  is  that  presented  by  the 
words  "  poco  mas  6  menos."  It  is  certainly  not  easy  to  say  what 
precise  effect  they  were  intended  to  have.  Some  operation  should 
clearly  be  given  them,  unless  they  are  so  hopelessly  vague  and  un- 
certain as  to  admit  of  no  definite  construction. 

The  grant  conveys  to  the  grantee  ''  a  part  of  the  land  known  as 
San  Leandro,"  and  proceeds  to  define  the  boundaries  with  more 
than  ordinary  precision.  The  third  condition  states  the  land  of 
which  donation  is  made  to  be  one  square  league,  a  little  more  or 
less,  (poco  mas  6  menos)  directs  it  to  be  measured,  and  reserves 
the  surplus.  The  quantity  of  land  contained  within  the  boundaries 
will  probably  exceed  one  league  by  a  considerable  fraction. 

Ought  then  the  words  "  poco  mas  6  menos  "  to  be  rejected  for 
uncertainty,  and  the  grantee  in  this  and  all  similar  cases  to  be  lim- 
ited to  tlie  i.irecise  quantity  of  one  league,  no  matter  how  small  the 
gore  or  strip  of  land  in  excess  may  on  measurement  be  found  to  be ; 
or  are  we  at  liberty  to  construe  the  words  referred  to  as  embracing 
such  fractional  part  of  a  league  as  may  be  found  within  the  bound- 
aries ?  The  question  is  one  of  intention  on  the  part  of  the  grantor. 
In  most  instances  the  description  in  these  grants  was  obviousty  in- 
tended to  designate  the  tract  out  of  which  the  granted  quantity  was 
to  be  taken,  rather  than  to  indicate  the  limits  of  the  land  granted. 

In  some  cases,  on  the  other  hand,  the  boundaries  are  indicated 
with  much  precision,  and  the  mention  of  quantity  is  obviously  rather 
a  conjectural  estimate  of  its  extent  than  intended  as  a  limitation  of 
the  grant  to  the  quantity  mentioned  ;  and  yet  in  these  cases  the 
sobrante  clause  is  added,  apparently  from  habit,  or  because  no  pains 
were  taken  to  vary  the  form  of  the  grant  according  to  the  circum- 
stances of  particular  cases. 

The  English  equivalent  for  the  words  ''  un  sitio,  poco  mas  6  me- 
nos," would  perhaps  be  given  by  the  phrase  "  about  one  square 
league."  Where  under  our  system  a  grant  specifies  the  boundaries, 
of  the  land  which  it  conveys  in  absolute  terms,  the  subsequent 
mention  of  its  extent  as  of  "  about  one  square  league,"  with  a  res- 
ervation of  the  surplus,  would  probably  be  inoperative.     It  may 


206  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Heirs  of  Estudillo. 

plausibly  be  argued,  that  if  any  part  of  the  grant  is  rejected  for 
uncertainty,  the  whole  phrase  (un  sitio,  poco  mas  6  menos)  should 
be  rejected,  and  not  merely  the  indefinite  words  which  terminate  it. 
Certainly,  if  the  expression  were  in  EngHsh  "  about  one  league," 
the  Court  would  hardly  strike  out  the  word  "  about"  and  construe 
the  words  "  one  league  "  as  indicating  that  precise  quantity — not 
to  be  exceeded  by  a  single  foot. 

It  has  on  the  whole  seemed  to  me  that  where  the  grant  describes 
in  its  granting  clause  a  particular  piece  of  land,  with  definite  or 
ascertainable  boundaries,  and  the  condition  mentions  the  extent  of 
ihe  land  so  granted  as  of  so  many  leagues,  "  more  or  less,"  the 
latter  expression  should  be  so  construed  as  to  embrace  such  addi- 
tional fractional  part  of  a  league  as  may  on  measurement  be  found 
within  the  boundaries.  There  is  certainly  some  difiiculty  in  determ- 
ining what  quantity  shall  by  this  clause  be  deemed  to  pass.  To 
allow  under  a  grant  of  one  league,  more  or  less,  three  or  four  or 
five  leagues  to  pass,  would  evidently  be  unreasonable,  unless  the 
condition  be  rejected  in  toto. 

It  would  seem  equally  unreasonable  to  restrict  the  grantee  to  the 
precise  quantity  of  one  league  as  determined  by  an  accurate  sur- 
vey, and  to  take  from  him  a  gore  of  land,  perhaps  a  few  yards  in 
width,  along  one  side  of  his  rancho,  and  which  is  clearly  embraced 
within  the  boundaries  as  mentioned  in  his  grant. 

I  think  the  words  should  be  allowed  a  reasonable  operation,  and 
that  where  the  description  contained  in  the  grant,  the  previous  pro- 
ceedings, and  the  circumstances  of  the  case  justify  the  belief  that 
the  grantor's  general  intention  was  to  grant  all  the  land  within  the 
boundaries,  the  words  "  poco  mas  6  menos  "  should  be  construed  to 
embrace  such  fractional  part  of  a  league  as  might  be  found  to  be  in 
excess  of  the  specified  quantity. 

The  Circuit  Court  and  the  Board  were  of  opinion  that  in  the 
grant  under  consideration,  the  excess,  such  as  it  was  shown  to  be, 
passed  to  the  grantee,  and  in  that  opinion  I  concur. 

A  decree  must  be  entered  affirming  the  decision  of  the  Board. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  207 


United  States  v.  Executors  of  Hartnell. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  EXECUTORS  OF 
W.  E.  P.  HARTNELL,  Deceased,  claiming  the  Rancho 

COSUMNES. 

Under  the  laws  of  Mexico,  more  than  eleven  leagues  of  land  could  not  be  granted 
in  colonization  to  any  one  person. 

Claim  for  eleven  leagues  of  land  in  Sacramento  county,  confirmed 
by  the  Board  for  six  leagues,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

William  Blanding,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

Halleck,  Peachy  &  Billings,  for  Appellees. 

The  land  claimed  by  the  appellees  before  the  Land  Commission 
was  a  tract  of  five  leagues  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  called  "  Todos 
Santos  y  San  Antonio,"  and  a  tract  of  eleven  leagues  on  the  river 
Cosumnes,  in  Sacramento  county. 

The  Commissioners  confirmed  to  the  claimant  the  five  league 
tract  and  six  leagues  of  the  Cosumnes  tract,  making  eleven  leagues 
in  all. 

From  this  decision  the  United  States  appeal.  It  is  insisted  on 
the  part  of  the  appellees,  that  the  claim  to  the  whole  of  the  Cos- 
umnes tract  should  be  confirmed,  and  that  the  limitation  of  it  to 
six  leagues  is  erroneous.  The  transcript  as  filed  in  this  Court  em- 
braces both  claims.  The  Todos  Santos  tract  is  situated  in  the 
southern  district ;  over  that  part  of  the  case  the  Court  has  there- 
fore no  jurisdiction. 

It  appears  from  the  proofs  that  the  grant  for  the  Todos  Santos 
tract  was  duly  issued  ;  that  it  was  occupied  and  cultivated  by  the 
grantee,  and  that  judicial  possession  of  it  was  formally  given. 

It  was  not,  however,  approved  by  the  Assembly,  for  reasons 
which  will  presently  be  stated. 

The  grant  of  the  Todos  Santos  tract  is  dated  Aug.  28th,  1841. 

On  the  third  of  November,  1844,  Hartnell  obtained  another 
grant  from  Micheltorena  of  eleven  leagues  on  the  Cosumnes.  The 
genuineness  of  both  these  grants  is  not  disputed. 


208  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Executors  of  Hartnell. 


On  the  sixteenth  of  March,  1846,  these  two  concessions  were 
referred  by  the  Assembly  to  the  committee  on  vacant  lands.  On 
the  thirteenth  of  April  following  the  committee  reported  ''  that  as 
the  decree  of  concession  for  the  Todos  Santos  tract  does  not  ex- 
press the  number  of  leagues  granted,  and  as  another  expediente 
has  been  presented  for  approval  for  eleven  leagues  on  Cosumnes 
river,  granted  to  the  same  party  Nov.  3d,  1844,  that  the  two  ex- 
pedientes  be  united,  and  as  the  law  gives  eleven  leagues  as  the 
maximum,  that  the  petitioner  be  required  to  present  his  title  for  the 
first  named  tract,  in  order  that  the  number  of  leagues  may  be  as- 
certained, and  that  the  party  may  then  apply  for  such  eleven 
leagues  in  the  two  tracts  as  may  suit  him  best." 

This  report  was  approved  by  the  Departmental  Assembly  on  the 
twenty-second  of  April  of  the  same  year.  The  direciions  given  to 
the  petitioner  were  not  complied  with — not,  as  suggested  by  his 
counsel,  because  it  was  the  Governor's  duty  to  submit  the  expedi- 
entes  for  approval,  for  the  report  expressly  requires  the  petitioner 
to  present  his  title  for  the  Todos  Santos  tract,  but  probably  because 
residing  at  a  distance  he  had  no  opportunity,  in  the  few  months 
which  intervened  before  the  subversion  of  the  Mexican  authority, 
to  comply  with  or  perhaps  even  learn  the  order  which  the  Assembly 
had  made.  At  all  events  no  further  action  was  had  in  the  Assem- 
bly on  either  grant. 

The  grantee  appears  to  have  occupied  his  land  by  placing  a  ten- 
ant in  possession  of  it,  by  whom  it  was  cultivated  soon  after  the 
date  of  the  grant.  He  has  also  conveyed  to  various  persons  por- 
tions of  it.  There  is  nothing  in  the  case  from  which  any  intention 
to  abandon  the  land  can  be  presumed,  unless  his  omission  to  pre- 
sent his  grant  for  Todos  Santos  to  the  Assembly,  as  required,  can 
be  so  construed.     But  such  a  construction  is  obviously  inadmissible. 

The  only  question  in  the  case  is  as  to  the  extent  to  which  the 
Cosumnes  title  should  be  confirmed. 

It  is  urged  that  the  limitation  of  the  quantity  of  land  which  the 
Governor  was  authorized  to  grant  did  not  apply  to  grants  made  to 
Mexican  citizens ;  and  secondly,  that  the  full  powers  given  to  Mich- 
eltorena  enabled  him  to  disregard  the  restriction. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  enter  into  a  discussion  of  these  },"oints,  for 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  209 


United  States  v.  Executors  of  Hartucll. 


the  Supreme  Court  has  in  unmistakable  hmguage  recognized  the 
restriction  of  the  powers  of  the  Governor. 

In  TJie  United  States  v.  LarJcin,  (18  How.  561)  the  Court  in 
speaking  of  the  decree  of  the  Court  below  limiting  the  quantity  of 
land  to  eleven  leagues,  say :  "  Especially  should  this  construction 
be  given,  as  the  power  of  the  Governor  to  grant  to  a  single  person 
teas  limited  so  as  not  to  exceed  this  quantity^  according  to  the 
twelfth  section  of  the  decree  of  the  Mexican  Congress  of  August ., 
1824."    . 

The  grant  in  that  case  was  made  by  Gov.  Micheltorcna,  Novem- 
ber 4th, 1844,  only  one  day  after  that  under  consideration.  Inde- 
pendently of  this  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court,  I  should  have  no 
difficulty  in  reaching  the  same  conclusion.  It  is  urged  that  Santa 
Anna  was  at  that  time  in  possession  of  absolute  legislative  and  ex- 
ecutive authority,  and  that  his  delegation  of  all  his  power  to  Mich- 
eltorcna conferred  upon  the  latter  authority  superior  to  that  of  any 
existing  law. 

But  the  power  of  the  most  absolute  despot  in  civilized  nations  is 
rather  the  power  to  make,  alter  or  abrogate  the  laws,  than  to  violate 
them.  So  long  as  the  law  remains  unrepealed  the  sovereign  is 
bound  by  it,  and  the  legality  of  any  act  done  by  him  must  be  tested 
by  the  laws  as  they  exist.  Such  I  understand  to  have  been  the 
theory  of  the  Spanish  jurisconsults,  and  though  the  distinction  in 
an  absolute  monarchy  may  be  rather  speculative  than  practical,  it 
is  of  some  importance  when  the  inquiry  relates  to  the  power  of  a 
subordinate  to  whom  the  despot  may  in  general  terms  have  dele- 
gated his  authority.  That  portion  of  the  colonization  law^s  which 
consisted  of  executive  regulations,  Micheltorena,  under  his  plenary 
powders,  might  perhaps  have  disregarded.  But  the  decree  of  the 
Mexican  Congress,  from  which  the  President  himself  derived  his 
authority  to  make  regulations  on  the  subject,  must  be  deemed  to 
have  remained  in  force  until  expressly  abrogated.  The  action  of 
Micheltorena  himself  in  submitting  these  grants  to  the  Assembly  is 
an  unmistakable  proof  that  he  considered  the  colonization  laws  were 
to  be  observed  by  him  in  form  and  in  substance,  and  the  refusal  of 
the  Assembly  to  approve  a  grant  for  more  than  eleven  leagues  is 
an  emphatic  declaration  of  what  was  the  received  construction  of 


210  IT.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Executors  of  Hartnell. 

the  law,  and  their  idea  of  the  Governor's  authority.  There  is  no 
reason  to  suppose  that  the  refusal  of  the  Assembly  to  approve  for 
the  reason  assigned  was  by  any  one  considered  an  erroneous  con- 
struction of  the  law,  or  an  unwarrantable  encroachment  on  the  ex- 
traordinary powers  of  the  Governor^ 

It  is  zealously  urged  by  the  counsel  for  the  appellees,  that  this  is 
no  longer  an  open  question  in  this  Court,  and  that  grants  have  al- 
ready been  confirmed  in  this  Court  for  a  greater  quantity  than 
eleven  leagues.  Such  may  possibly  be  the  fact.  It  is  enough, 
however,  to  say  that  in  the  case  alluded  to  (that  of  Petaluma)  the 
decision  of  the  Board  was  affirmed  by  this  Court  without  examina- 
tion, and  on  the  statement  of  the  District  Attorney  in  open  Court, 
that  no  valid  objection  to  a  confirmation  existed.  It  is  also  to  be 
observed  that  in  that  case  the  grant  was  for  ten  leagues,  and  that 
the  additional  five  leagues  were  acquired  by  purchase,  the  grantee 
having  paid  to  the  Government  a  considerable  sum  of  money  for  the 
land. 

I  am  not  aware  that  until  the  present  case  it  has  been  claimed  in 
this  Court  that  Gov.  Micheltorena  or  any  other  Governor  had 
authority  to  make  a  gratuitous  concession  of  more  than  eleven 
leagues  of  land  to  a  single  individual.  Certainly,  no  ruling  to  that 
effect  has  been  made,  and  even  if  it  had  been,  the  construction 
given  to  the  law  by  the  Departmental  Assembly  and  the  Supreme 
Court  would  expose  its  incorrectness. 

It  appears  from  the  record  that  Hartnell  had,  before  the  grant 
issued  for  the  Cosumnes  tract,  obtained  a  grant  for  two-thirds  of  a 
league  in  a  place  called  Alisal.  This  land,  however,  he  seems  to 
have  purchased,  and  the  grant  was  probably  obtained  to  strengthen 
the  title  previously  acquired.  The  Commissioners  do  not  appear  to 
have  noticed  this  grant,  but  confirmed  the  claim  for  the  five  leagues 
in  Todos  Santos  and  six  leagues  in  Cosumnes.  I  do  not  think  the 
proof  sufficiently  clear  as  to  the  AUsal  tract  to  authorize  the  de- 
duction of  the  quantity  mentioned  in  that  grant  from  the  six  leagues 
of  Cosumnes  confirmed  to  the  appellees. 

A  decree  must  be  entered  confirming  the  claim  to  Cosumnes  to 
the  extent  of  six  leagues. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1856.  211 

United  States  v.  Fossat. 

THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  CHARLES  FOS- 
SAT, CLAIMING  THE  RaNCHO  LoS   CaPITANCILLOS. 

The  geniiincness  of  the  grant  in  this  case  not  disputed.  The  ruling  in  Estudil- 
lo's  case,  tliat  tlie  words  "  poco  mas  6  menos  "  are  operative  for  such  fractional 
parts  of  a  league  as  may  be  in  excess  of  the  quantity  named  in  the  grant,  re- 
affirmed. The  southern  boundary  of  the  land  granted  to  Justo  Larios  de- 
clared to  be  the  main  Sierra,  and  not  the  low  hills  or  lomas  bajas. 

Claim  for  one  league  of  land  in  Santa  Clara  county,  confirmed 
bj  the  Board,  and  appealed  bj  the  United  States. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

A.  P.  Crittenden,  for  Appellee. 

At  the  hearing  of  this  case,  the  Court  entertaining  no  doubt 
upon  the  points  presented,  expressed  verbally  its  opinion.  At  the 
suggestion  of  the  attorney  for  the  claimants,  I  have  committed  to 
writing  the  substance  of  the  views  then  expressed. 

The  genuineness  of  the  grant  was  not  disputed.  The  only  ques- 
tions discussed  were  as  to  the  extent  and  the  boundaries  of  the 
tract  granted. 

The  land  is  described  in  the  grant  as  known  by  the  name  of  the 
Capitancillos,  bounded  by  the  Sierra,  by  the  Arroyo  Seco  on  the 
side  of  the  Establishment  of  Santa  Clara,  and  by  the  rancho  of 
citizen  Jose  R.  Berreyesa,  which  has  for  a  boundary  a  line  running 
from  the  junction  of  the  Arroyo  Seco  and  Arroyo  de  los  Alamitos 
southward  to  the  Sierra,  passing  by  the  eastern  ''  falda "  of  the 
small  hill  situated  in  the  center  of  the  Canada. 

The  third  condition  states  that  the  land  herein  referred  to  is  one 
league  de  ganado  mayor,  a  httle  more  or  less,  as  is  explained  by  the 
map  accompanying  the  expediente. 

It  had  been  urged  to  the  Court  in  previous  cases,  that  where  the 
conditions  of  a  grant  mentioned  the  tract  referred  to  as  of  so  many 
leagues  "  a  little  more  or  less,"  the  latter  words  should  be  rejected 
for  uncertainty,  and  the  quantity  of  land  should  be  hmited  to  the 
number  of  leagues  mentioned.  But  this  construction  the  Court 
had  refused  to  adopt.    It  was  considered  that  the  inquiry  in  these  as 


212  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


United  Slates  v.  Eos  sat. 


in  other  grants  was  as  to  the  iJilentlon  of  the  grantor,  a,nd  that  the 
Court  could  not  attribute  to  him  an  intention  to  grant  so  many 
leagues  and  no  more,  in  the  face  of  his  declaration  that  he  intended 
to  grant  the  specified  quantity,  a  'Mittle*more  or  less." 

It  is  not  necessary  now  to  recapitulate  the  various  considerations 
upon  vvhich  the  Court  determined  the  question.  It  was  of  opinion 
that  where  the  boundaries  of  tlie  land  granted  were  designated 
with  reasonable  certainty,  the  mention  in  the  condition  of  a  certain 
number  of  leagues,  "  more  or  less,"  as  the  quantity  of  land  granted, 
should  be  considered  as  indicating  an  intention  to  grant  the  whole 
tract  within  the  boundaries,  provided  .he  excess  over  and  above  the 
number  of  leagues  mentioned  was  not  so  great  as  to  indicate  gross 
error  or  fraud ;  and  that,  as  under  the  former  Government  the  or- 
dinary unit  of  measurement  was  a  league,  the  term  "  more  or  less" 
should  at  least  be  construed  to  embrsjce  such  fractional  parts  of  a 
league  as  might  be  found  within  the  boundaries,  if  no  greater  ex- 
cess than  some  fraction  of  a  league  were  found  within  them.  It 
may  deserve  consideration  whether  such  a  mention  of  quantity 
should  not  be  considered  in  all  cases,  except  those  of  gross  error  or 
fraud,  rather  a  conjectural  estimate  of  the  quantity  previously 
granted  than  as  a  hmitation  of  that  quantity,  and  whether  the  grant 
should  not  be  deemed,  except  in  the  cases  referred  to,  a  grant  by 
metes  and  bounds,  or  by  boundaries. 

It  is  enough,  however,  for  the  present  to  say  that  this  Court  has 
decided  that  under  the  words  "  more  or  less"  such  fractional  part 
of  a  league  over  and  above  the  number  of  leagues  mentioned  will 
pass,  as  may  be  contained  within  the  boundaries  described  in  the 
grant.  This  point  was  not  discussed  at  the  hearing  of  this  case, 
the  District  Attorney  being  aware  that  it  had  already  been  passed 
upon  by  the  Court. 

The  questions  more  particularly  debated  were — 1st,  whether  this 
Court  had  any  power  by  its  decree  to  designate  the  boundaries  of 
the  tract  confirmed  to  the  claimant,  or  whether  the  language  of  the 
grant  must  be  adopted,  leaving  the  location  of  the  boundaries  and 
the  identification  of  the  natural  objects  called  for  to  the  Surveyor 
General.     Secondly,  what  were  the  boundaries  called  for. 

As  to  the  first  point  I  entertain  no  doubt.    The  Court  is  not,  it  is 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  213 


United  States  v.  Foss.it. 


true,  authorized  by  the  act  to  designate  the  "  extent,  locahty  and 
boundaries"  of  the  granted  land.  This,  in  the  absence  of  a  prelim- 
inary survey,  would  be  impracticable ;  but  the  determh)arion  of  the 
validity  of  a  claim  to  a  particular  tract  of  land  necessarily  involves 
an  inquiry,  to  a  certain  degree,  into  the  boundaries  or  the  extent  of 
the  tract,  the  validity  of  the  title  to  whicli  is  in  question. 

If  the  Court  decrees  that  the  title  of  the  claimant  is  valid  to  a 
piece  of  land,  it  should  by  its  decree  identify  and  designate  that 
land,  so  that  it  may  be  known  to  what  the  claim  is  valid.  But 
surely  it  is  not  only  its  right  but  its  duty  to  construe  by  the  aid  of 
evidence  and  argument  any  ambiguity  or  uncertainty  a|)[)arent  on 
the  face  of  the  grant  itself,  and  where  the  grant,  as  in  tliis  case, 
speaks  of  a  "  Sierra  "  as  a  boundary,  to  ascertain  and  declare  what 
Sierra  is  meant,  and  to  express  in  its  decree  that  it  confirms  a  claim 
to  a  tract  bounded  by  a  particular  and  specified  Sierra,  and  not  by 
such  Sierra  as  the  Surveyor  General  may  consider  to  have  been 
intended. 

The  Supreme  Court,  in  many  of  the  cases  brought  up  on  appeal 
from  this  Court,  have  entered  fully  and  freely  into  the  (juestion  of 
boundaries,  and  appear  to  have  considered  their  determination  not 
only  as  widiin  their  jurisdiction,  but  as  an  appropriate  and  import- 
ant part  of  their  duties. 

The  remaining  question  to  be  considered  is,  what  boundaries  were 
intended  by  the  grantor.  The  only  one  of  those  mentioned,  the 
identity  of  which  was  debated,  is  the  southern  boundary  micntioned 
in  the  grant  as  "  the  Sierra."  The  point  to  be  determined  is — 
what  natural  object  was  meant. 

The  evidence  shows  that  the  tract  called  Capitancillos  is  a  valley 
lying  along  an  arroyo  or  brook  ;  on  the  southerly  side  extends  a 
range  of  low  hills,  running  from  east  to  west.  At  their  eastern  ex- 
tremity, where  they  are  intersected  by  the  Alamitos,  these  hills 
attain  considerable  elevation,  but  they  decline  in  heiglit  towards 
the  w^est,  where  they  reach  and  are  turned  by  the  arroyo  Seco. 
Behind  this  ridge  or  cuchilia  the  main  Sierra  or  mountain  chain 
raises  itself  to  a  great  lieight,  and  is  separated  from^  the  ridge  of 
"lomas  bajas,"  already  spoken  of,  by  the  two  streams  mentioned. 
These  streams  rise  at  an  inconsiderable  distance  from  each  other, 


214  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Fossat. 

and  flowing  in  opposite  directions  between  the  Sierra  and  the 
lomas  bajas,  they  turn  the  eastern  and  western  extremities  of  the 
latter  and  debouch  into  the  plain.  Upon  the  slopes  of  the  ridge  of 
low  hills,  as  well  towards  the  valley  on  the  north  as  towards  the 
streams  behind  it  on  the  south,  the  best  or  most  permanent  grazing 
is  to  be  found,  and  on  this  ridge  are  situated  the  valuable  quicksil- 
ver mines,  the  existence  of  which  gives  to  this  inquiry  its  chief  im- 
portance. 

The  question  is — Is  the  Sierra  mentioned  in  the  grant  the  mount- 
ain chain  to  the  south  of  the  lomas  bajas,  or  is  it  the  lomas  bajas 
themselves  ? 

If  there  were  no  other  means  of  determining  this  question,  the 
word  "  Sierra  "  itself,  by  its  necessary  import  as  well  as  from  the 
evidence  which  shows  to  which  of  these  natural  objects  it  w^as  in 
fact  appKed,  would  leave  httle  room  for  doubt.  The  natural  and 
ordinary  meaning  of  the  term  clearly  points  us  to  a  great  mountain 
chain,  rather  than  to  a  ridge  of  low  hills  parallel  to  but  separated 
from  it.  The  evidence  is  conclusive  that  such  was  the  meaning  and 
use  of  the  word  with  reference  to  these  particular  natural  objects, 
and  that  while  the  mountain  range  was  known  as  the  Sierra,  the 
ridge  of  low  hills  was  known  as  the  "  cuchilla  la  mina  de  Luis  Cha- 
boya,"  or  as  the  lomas  bajas. 

The  expediente  furnishes  more  conclusive  evidence  on  this  point. 
The  tract  is  described,  as  we  have  seen,  as  of  one  "  league,  a  little 
more  or  less,  as  is  explained  by  the  map  accompanying  the  expedi- 
ente." On  this  map  is  found  rudely  delineated  a  mountain  range, 
and  this  mountain  range  is  inscribed  *'  Sierra  del  Encino,"  or  "  of 
the  oak  tree."  The  Sierra  mentioned  in  the  grant  is  therefore 
evidently  the  "  Sierra  del  Encino,"  for  that  is  the  only  Sierra  delin- 
eated on  the  map. 

The  evidence  discloses  that  there  is  on  the  main  Sierra  or  mount- 
ain chain  an  oak  tree  of  extraordinary  proportions  and  striking  ap- 
pearance. Situated  on  a  spur  or  ridge  of  the  mountain,  it  is  a  con- 
spicuous natural  object  from  all  parts  of  the  valley  and  for 
many  miles  around.  The  photograph  exhibited  in  Court  shows 
that  its  size  and  isolated  situation  are  such  as  to  strike  the  eye  and 
arrest  the  attention  of  the  most  casual  observer.     Few  who  reside 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  215 


United  States  v.  Fossat. 


in  that  part  of  the  country  but  are  acquainted  with  the  existence 
and  situation  of  this  tree,  and  it  appears  in  the  speech  of  manj 
of  the  former  inhabitants  to  have  given  a  name  to  the  Sierra  on 
which  it  is  situated.  If  then,  as  appears  indisputable,  the  Sierra 
referred  to  in  the  grant  be  the  "  Sierra  del  Encino,"  the  Sierra  on 
which  this  oak  tree  is  situated  must  be  the  one. 

A  still  further  confirmation  of  these  views  is  derived  from  the 
map  accompanying  the  expediente  of  Berreyesa. 

The  grant  we  are  considering  mentions  as  the  eastern  boundary 
of  the  tract  granted,  "  the  rancho  of  citizen  Jose  R.  Berreyesa, 
which  has  for  a  boundary  a  line  running  from  the  junction  of  the 
arroyo  Seco  and  arroyo  de  los  Alamitos  southward  to  the  Sierra," 
etc.  This  line  thus  dividing  the  two  ranches  had  previously  been  a 
subject  of  dispute  between  the  colindantes  or  neighboring  proprie- 
tors. It  was  finally  settled,  however,  by  the  Government  before 
the  grants  were  issued,  and  a  dotted  line,  indicating  the  boundary 
agreed  upon  by  the  parties  and  fixed  by  the  Government,  was  made 
on  the  diseno  of  Berreyesa.  This  line  is  described  in  both  grants 
in  the  same  terms.  That  under  consideration  refers,  as  we  have 
seen,  to  the  rancho  of  Berreyesa  as  the  boundary  of  the  rancho  of 
Justo  Larios,  and  then  describes  the  line  as  the  boundary  of  Berre- 
yesa's  tract.  The  same  inverted  mode  of  description  is  used  in  the 
grant  to  Berreyesa.  To  determine  what  the  boundary  of  Justo  La- 
rios' land  is,  we  must,  in  literal  compliance  with  the  terms  of  the 
grant,  ascertain  the  boundary  of  Berreyesa's  land,  and  in  ascertain- 
ing the  latter  we  resort  to  the  map  on  which  the  dotted  line  is 
marked.  In  Berreyesa's  grant,  as  in  that  of  Justo  Larios,  the  line 
is  described  as  extending  to  the  "  Sierra,"  and  as  the  ranches  were 
coterminous  and  the  eastern  boundary  of  one  is  the  western  boundary 
of  the  other,  the  "  Sierra  "  to  which  their  common  line  of  division 
extends  must  be  the  same.  On  recurring,  then,  to  Berreyesa's 
map  and  the  dotted  fine  alluded  to,  all  doubt  is  dissipated  as  to  the 
range  of  mountains  referred  to. 

On  this  map  two  ranges  of  hills  or  mountains  are  rudely  but  un- 
mistakably delineated.  They  are  separated  by  a  broad  valley — far 
broader  than  that  actually  existing,  but  indicating  by  its  exagger- 
ated delineation  the  discrimination  in  the  grantor's  mind  between 


216  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 


the  ridge  of  low  hills  and  the  Sierra,  or  mountain  range  behind  it. 
The  lower  ridge  is  inscribed  "  Lomas  Bajas,"  while  the  chain  be- 
hind it  and  distinctly  separated  from  it  is  inscribed  ''  Sierra  Azul,'* 
from  the  hue  which  the  mountains  assume  at  a  distance. 

The  dotted  line  which  by  the  grant  is  to  terminate  at  the 
"  Sierra,"  is  produced  across  the  "  Lomas  Bajas,"  across  the  valley 
beyond  them,  and  terminates  at  the  "  Sierra  Azul." 

There  can  thus  be  no  room  for  doubt  that  the  Sierra  intended 
was  the  main  sierra  or  mountain  range,  and  as  the  western  line  of 
the  land  of  Berreyesa  extended  to  this  range,  the  land  of  Juste 
Larios,  which  has  the  same  line  described  in  the  same  terms  as  its 
eastern  boundary,  must  have  the  same  extent.  The  Sierra  referred 
to  in  Justo  Larios'  grant  must  necessarily  be  the  same  as  that  refer- 
red to  in  the  grant  of  Berreyesa,  and  as  to  the  latter,  there  can  be, 
as  we  have  seen,  no  question. 

Other  considerations  in  support  of  this  view  might  be  urged.  I 
think  it  unnecessary.  There  seems  to  me  no  room  for  doubt  that 
the  Sierra  referred  to  in  the  grant  was  the  main  Sierra  described 
by  the  witnesses,  and  not  the  range  of  low  hills  which  has  been  at- 
tempted to  be  assigned  as  a  boundary. 


JOSEPH  C.  PALMER  et  al.,  CLAiMma  the  Rancho  Pukta 
DE  LoBOS,  Appellants,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

In  cases  pendino-  luidcr  the  Act  of  March  3d,  1851,  sonic  indulo:ence  should  be 
c?;ten(lcd  by  the  Court  to  the  District  Attorney,  in  order  that  he  may  have 
a  reasonable  time  in  ^yhich  to  prepare  them  for  trial. 

This  was  a  motion  by  claimants,  that  the  case  be  set  for  hearing 
at  an  early  day. 

E.  L.  GooLD,  for  the  motion. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  opposing. 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  217 


Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States, 


A  motion  is  made  to  set  this  case  for  a  hearing  at  an  early 
day,  which  is  opposed  by  the  District  Attorney. 

The  transcript  was  filed  in  this  Court  on  the  thirtieth  of  January, 
1856.  The  cause  was  placed  on  the  calendar,  but  was  not  reached 
until  April  13th,  1857,  when  it  was  set  for  a  hearing  on  the  sixth 
of  May  ensuing.  On  the  sixth  of  May,  the  Court  was  not  in  ses- 
sion, and  the  rule  requiring  the  examination  in  Court  of  witnesses 
in  cases  where  fraud  was  alleged  having  been  suspended,  depositions 
were  taken  on  various  days  up  to  May  15th,  when  the  claimant's 
attorney  gave  notice  to  the  District  Attorney  of  his  readiness  to 
submit  the  case.  On  Monday,  May  .18th,  the  District  Attorney 
obtained  from  the  Court  one  week  further  time  to  take  testimony. 

On  Monday  the  twenty-fifth  of  May,  the  District  Attorney,  de- 
siring a  further  postponement  of  the  case,  a  week's  time  was  granted 
by  the  Court. 

On  Monday,  June  1st,  the  claimant's  counsel  moved  the  hearing 
of  the  cause;  but  having,  from  a  misconception  of  the  practice, 
omitted  to  prove  certain  mesne  conveyances  before  the  commission- 
ers, though  the  originals  duly  acknowledged  were  produced  in  Court, 
the  cause  was  again,  at  the  instance  of  the  District  Attorney,  post- 
poned for  two  weeks. 

On  the  fifteenth  of  June,  the  claimant's  counsel  again  moved 
the  hearing  of  the  cause.  This  motion  was  opposed  by  the  District 
Attorney.  No  affidavit,  however,  was  presented  by  him,  nor  state- 
ment of  any  testimony  he  expected  to  procure.  No  names  of  wit- 
nesses were  given ;  but  the  importance  of  the  case  was  referred  to, 
and  the  hope  expressed  that  some  testimony  to  establish  the  fraud 
suggested  might  be  obtained  in  the  course  of  a  few  weeks. 

The  Court,  desirous  of  affording  exerj.  facility  for  the  ascertain- 
ment of  the  real  merits  of  the  case,  again  postponed  the  cause  ; 
and  as  the  Judge  was  about  to  be  absent  from  the  city,  six  weeks 
were  allowed,  and  the  cause  fixed  for  July  27th. 

On  the  twenty-seventh  of  July,  the  hearing  was  again  moved  by 
the  claimant's  counsel,  and  a  further  postponement  was  asked  by  the 
District  Attorney.  On  being  inquired  of  by  the  Court,  he  de- 
clined to  specify  any  time  at  which  he  would  be  ready  to  submit 
the  case,  but  intimated  that  he  required  a  delay  of  some  months. 


218  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States, 

He  did  not  give  the  Court  to  understand  that  he  was  in  possession 
of  any  facts  susceptible  of  proof,  or  that  he  knew  of  any  witnesses 
by  whom  the  case,  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  could  be 
made  out.  He  contended,  however,  that  the  cause  had  lost  its 
place  on  the  calendar,  and  should  be  postponed  until  regularly 
called  in  its  order,  and  he  expressed  the  hope  that  by  that  time  he 
would  be  able  to  procure  some  testimony  on  the  part  of  the  Gov- 
ernment. No  evidence,  either  oral  or  documentary,  has  been 
taken  or  filed  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  since  the  cause  has 
been  pending  in  this  Court,  or  within  the  last  two  years. 

It  will  not  be  disputed  that  the  intention  of  Congress  was  to  se- 
cure the  speedy  settlement  of  land  claims  in  this  State. 

It  was  accordingly  provided  by  Sec.  9  of  the  Act  of  1851, 
that  after  the  service  of  the  answer  to  the  petition  for  a  review  of 
the  decision  of  the  Board,  the  cause  should  stand  for  trial  at  the 
next  term  of  the  Court  thereafter,  unless,  on  cause  shown,  the  same 
should  be  continued  by  the  Court. 

I  think  the  claimants  have,  under  the  circumstances  of  this  case, 
an  unquestionable  right  to  have  the  case  heard  and  disposed  of.  I 
shall,  therefore,  set  it  for  hearing  on  Monday  next,  the  tenth  day 
of  August — with  liberty,  however,  to  the  District  Attorney,  on  or 
before  that  day,  to  show  cause  for  a  continuance  by  affidavit,  stat- 
ing the  facts  intended  to  be  proved,  the  names  of  the  witnesses, 
the  time  within  which  they  can  be  produced,  and  the  reasons  for 
their  not  having  been  heretofore  examined. 

I  am  aware  that,  in  suffering  the  cause  to  be  again  postponed, 
even  on  the  showing  indicated,  I  may  seem  to  be  allowing  too  great 
indulgence  ;  but  the  large  number  of  these  cases,  which  renders  it 
impossible  for  the  District  Attorney  to  devote  his  exclusive  attention 
to  any  one,  the  difficulty  of  procuring  information  as  to  the  facts, 
the  importance  of  this  particular  case,  and  the  circumstance  that 
the  law  officer  of  the  Government  has  but  recently  entered  upon 
his  office,  have  induced  me  to  give  to  that  officer  all  the  opportuni- 
ties for  the  preparation  of  these  cases  which,  without  disregarding 
the  rights  of  the  claimants,  I  can  extend  to  him. 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  219 


Romero  et  al.  v.  United  States. 


INOCENCIO  ROMERO  et  al,  claiming  El  Sobrante,  Appel- 
lants, vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

Where  no  grant,  either  perfect  or  inchoate,  was  made,  nor  any  promise  given 
that  a  grant  would  be  made,  mere  occupation  by  the  petitioner  pending  his 
application  for  the  land  does  not  constitute  a  valid  claim. 

Claim  for  five  leagues  of  land  in  Contra  Costa  county,  rejected 
bj  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  United  States. 

E.  A.  Lawrence,  for  Appellants. 

P.  Dblla  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

It  appears  from  the  expediente  on  file  in  the  archives,  that  on 
the  eighteenth  day  of  January,  1844,  the  brothers  Romero  peti- 
tioned the  Governor  in  the  usual  form  for  a  grant  of  land,  being  a 
sobrante  lying  between  the  ranchos  of  Moraga,  Pacheco  and  Welsh. 
This  petition  was  by  a  marginal  order  referred  to  the  Honorable 
Secretary  for  his  report.  The  Secretary  referred  the  papers  to  the 
First  Alcade  of  San  Jose,  with  directions  to  summon  Moraga, 
Pacheco  and  Welsh,  hear  their  allegations,  and  return  the  papers 
to  the  office. 

On  the  first  of  February,  1844,  the  First  Alcalde  reports  that 
the  owners  of  the  lands  bounded  by  the  tract  have  been  confronted 
with  the  petitioners,  and  that  the  former  are  willing  and  desirous 
that  the  land  be  granted.  He  adds  that  it  had  come  to  his  knowl- 
edge that  one  Francisco  Soto  claimed  the  tract  some  six  or  seven 
years  ago.  But  as  he  had  never  used  or  cultivated  it,  the  peti- 
tioners appeared  to  him  to  be  entitled  to  the  favor  they  ask. 

On  the  fourth  of  February,  1844,  Manuel  Jimeno,  the  Secretary, 
reports  to  the  Governor  that,  in  view  of  the  report  of  the  First 
Alcalde,  there  would  seem  to  be  no  obstacle  to  making  the  grant. 

On  this  report  of  the  Secretary,  the  Governor  makes  the  fol- 
lowing order  :  "  Let  the  Judge  of  the  proper  district  take  measure- 
ment of  the  unoccupied  land  that  is  claimed,  in  presence  of  the 
neighbors,  and  certify  the  result,  so  that  it  may  be  granted  to  the 
petitioners.  Micheltorena." 

15 


220  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Romero  ct  al.  v.  United  States. 

On  the  twenty-first  of  March,  1844,  the  claimants  addressed  a 
petition  to  the  Governor,  representing  that,  owing  to  the  absence  of 
the  owners  of  the  neighboring  lands,  the  Judge  of  the  Pueblo  of 
San  Jos6  had  been  unable  to  execute  the  superior  order,  (above 
recited)  and  soliciting  that  his  Excellency  would  grant  the  tract  to 
them,  "  either  provisionally,  or  in  such  a  way  as  he  should  deem 
fit,"  while  there  was  yet  time  for  planting,  &c. 

On  this  petition  Jimeno  reports  (March  23d,  1844)  that  the 
original  order  should  be  carried  into  effect  as  to  the  measurement 
of  the  land,  and  that  "  as  soon  as  that  was  accomplished,  Senor 
Romero  can  present  himself  with  Senor  Soto,  who  says  he  has  a 
right  to  the  same  tract." 

The  Governor  thereupon  made  the  following  order  :  "  Let  every 
thing  be  done  agreeably  to  the  foregoing  report.    Micheltorena." 

The  above  documents  constitute  the  whole  expediente  on  file  in 
the  archives.  From  the  document  produced  by  the  claimants  from 
the  files  of  the  Alcalde's  office,  it  appears  tliat  on  the  same  day, 
March  23d,  1844,  Jimeno  communicated  to  the  Alcalde  the  order 
of  the  Governor  that  the  sobrante  solicited  by  the  Romeros  should 
be  measured,  and  that  if  it  should  be  necessary  a  measurement  of 
the  adjoining  ranches  should  also  be  made — with  the  understanding 
that  those  parties  who  should  become  "  agraciados  "  should  bear 
the  expense. 

It  is  evident  that  up  to  the  date  of  the  last  order  of  Michel- 
torena no  grant  of  the  land  had  issued.  That  pursuant  to  the 
recommendation  of  Jimeno,  the  Governor  declined  to  make  even  a 
provisional  grant  as  solicited,  and  that  final  action  in  the  matter  was 
deferred  until  a  measurement  should  be  made,  and  until  Romero 
and  Soto  should  present  themselves.  Jimeno  does  not  seem  to 
have  finally  adopted  the  opinion  of  the  Alcalde  that  Soto  had  for- 
feited his  rights  to  the  land,  for  he  recommends  to  the  Governor,  as 
we  have  seen,  that  the  land  should  be  measured  without  delay,  and 
that  then  '^'  Romero  should  present  himself,  joined  with  Senor  Soto, 
who  says  he  has  a  right  to  the  same  land^ 

In  this  recommendation  the  Governor  concurs. 

There  is  certainly  nothing  in  these  proceedings  which  indicate 
that  the  Governor  had  finally  determined  to  grant  the  land,  though 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  221 

Romero  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

it  is  evident  that  he  regarded  the  apphcation  with  favor  ;  still  less 
can  any  of  the  orders  made  bj  him  be  construed  to  import  a  pres- 
ent grant.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  clear  that  the  Governor  refuses 
to  make  even  a  provisional  grant,  but  insists  that  a  measurement 
shall  first  be  made,  and  then  that  Romero  and  Soto  shall  appear 
before  him,  evidently  with  the  view  of  determining  the  rights  of 
the  latter. 

The  subsequent  proceedings,  as  shown  by  documents  exhibited 
by  the  claimants,  confirm  this  view. 

On  the  fifteenth  of  January,  1847,  Romero  and  Garcia,  the 
present  claimants,  appeared  before  John  Burton,  the  Alcalde  of  San 
Jose,  and  executed  a  paper  in  the  presence  of  the  Alcalde  and  two 
witnesses,  reciting  a  sale  by  Romero  to  Garcia  of  one-half  the  land, 
and  stipulating  that  both  parties  should  remain  subject  to  the  final 
result,  "  if  the  Government  grant  it  in  owner  ship. ^^  And  if  the 
contrary  should  be  "  the  case,  then  Garcia  should  lose  equally  with 
Romero,  without  any  right  to  reclaim  the  consideration  paid."  This 
paper  is  signed  by  the  parties,  the  Alcalde  and  the  witnesses. 

On  the  twenty-eighth  of  May,  1847,  Jose  Romero  addressed  a 
petition  to  John  Burton,  Alcalde  of  San  Jose,  representing  that  as 
early  as  1844,  an  order  from  the  former  Government  had  been  sent 
to  the  Alcalde's  Court  requiring  a  measurement  of  the  land  called 
"  Juntas  ;  "  that  such  measurement  had  not  yet  been  made.  He 
therefore  solicits  the  Alcade  to  give  him  a  testimonial  of  the  reports 
which  in  the  year  1844  were  sent  to  the  Government,  so  "  that  we 
can  he  granted  said  land,^^ 

The  Alcalde  in  a  marginal  order  directs  that  the  lands  should  be 
measured  according  to  the  original  order  of  the  Suprem,e  Govern- 
ment. In  the  margin  of  the  order  transmitted  by  Jimeno,  under 
date  of  March  23d,  1844,  the  Alcalde  writes  :  "  Be  it  done  accord- 
ingly, on  the  ninth  of  April,  1847.  The  interested  parties  will 
proceed  to  take  possession  of  the  mentioned  land  according  to  the 
order  of  the  Government.  I  further  order,  that  in  case  any  border- 
ing land  owner  demand  it,  a  measurement  of  his  land  be  ordered. 

"  John  Burton,  J.  P." 

It  appears,  moreover,  that  about  two  months  before  the  date  of 
their  last  petition,  viz :  on  the  thirty-first  of  March,  1847,  Jos^ 


222  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Romero  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

Romero  had  addressed  a  petition  to  the  same  Alcaide,  representing 
that  some  years  before  he  had  solicited  a  piece  of  land  in  the 
Canada  de  San  Ramon,  and  bordering  upon  lands  of  Don  M.  Castro, 
and  that  his  Excellency  had  ordered  the  lands  of  Castro  to  be 
measured,  which  had  never  been  done.  The  petitioners  further 
stated  that  they  were  two  brothers,  with  a  numerous  family,  and 
were  without  any  piece  of  land  whatever  to  raise  cattle  ;  they 
therefore  begged  the  Alcalde  to  provide  for  them  as  soon  as  possi- 
ble, that  they  might  retain  and  locate  their  stock. 

The  Alcalde  on  the  fifth  of  April  orders  that  the  fufillment  of 
the  superior  order  should  be  at  once  proceeded  to.  The  entry  in 
the  marginal  order  transmitted  by  Jimeno  was  made  on  the 
Romeros'  petition  of  the  twenty-third  of  March,  and  not  on  that  of 
the  twenty-eighth  of  May,  above  referred  to  ;  for  it  directs  the 
measurement  to  be  proceeded  to  on  the  ninth  of  April.  And, 
finally,  on  the  twenty-seventh  of  December,  1847,  K.  H.  Dimmick, 
then  Alcalde,  makes  an  order  in  which,  after  reciting  that  disputes 
as  to  the  boundaries  existed  between  the  Romeros  and  Domingo 
Peralta,  he  directs  that  the  boundaries  be  established  and  adjusted 
in  the  manner  specified  in  the  order  of  the  Governor,  dated  twenty- 
third  of  March,  1844. 

I  have  stated  the  contents  of  these  various  documents  with  some 
particularity,  because  an  attempt  has  been  made  since  the  rejection 
of  the  claim  by  the  Board,  to  show  by  parol  evidence  that  a  final 
grant  issued  to  the  Romeros,  which  has  been  lost. 

We  have  seen  that  the  last  document  in  the  expediente  is  the 
order  of  the  Governor  of  the  twenty-third  of  March,  1844,  adopt- 
ing Jimeno's  recommendation  that  a  measurement  should  be  made 
before  issuing  the  final  grant,  or  even  a  provisional  one  as  solicited 
by  Romero  ;  and  even  then  it  does  not  seem  that  the  grant  was 
certainly  to  be  made,  for  Romero  and  Soto  were  to  "  present  them- 
selves," evidently  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  the  Governor  to 
ascertain  their  respective  rights. 

Nothing  further  seems  to  have  been  done,  either  by  the  Govern- 
ment or  the  petitioners,  until  1847. 

On  the  thirty-first  of  March  of  that  year  we  find  the  Romeros  rep- 
resenting to  the  Alcalde  that  the  Governor  had  some  years  before 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  223 

Komero  et  al.  v.  United   States. 

ordered  the  land  to  be  measured,  which  had  not  been  done  ;  and 
that  they  were  without  any  piece  of  land  whatever,  and  they  beg 
the  Alcalde  to  provide  for  them.  The  Alcalde  thereupon  directs 
that  the  superior  order  of  March  23d,  1844,  be  proceeded  to. 

On  the  twenty-eighth  of  May,  1847,  the  Romeros  again  petition 
the  Alcalde,  representing  that  as  early  as  1844,  the  Governor  had 
sent  to  the  Alcalde's  Court  an  order  requiring  a  measurement  of 
the  land  ;  they  therefore  ask  a  testimonial  of  the  reports  and  orders 
in  his  office,  "  so  that  we  may  he  granted  the  landy  The  Alcalde 
again  directs  the  superior  order  of  March  23d,  1844,  to  be  com- 
pHed  with  ;  and  on  the  day  following  a  declaration  is  made  before 
the  Alcalde  by  Antonio  M.  Pico,  that  Don  J.  Moraga  and  Don  L. 
Pacheco,  the  cohndantes,  had  declared  that  for  their  parts  the  sur- 
plus of  land  which  does  not  belong  to  them  "  co\dd  he  granted  to 
the  Romeros." 

And,  finally,  the  deed  from  Romero  to  Garcia  of  January  15th, 
1847,  expressly  stipulates  that  both  the  parties  to  it  should  remain 
subject  to  the  final  result,  ''  if  the  Government  grant  it  in  oivner- 
shij),  and  if  the  contrary  should  he  the  case,  then  Garcia  should 
lose  equally  with  Romero  without  reclamation." 

These  documents  appear  to  me  to  establish  beyond  doubt  that  all 
action  of  the  Government  on  the  application  of  the  Romeros  termi- 
nated with  the  order  of  March  23d,  1844,  directing  the  measure- 
ment as  an  indispensable  preliminary  to  a  grant,  either  final  or 
provisional.  That  during  the  year  1847,  the  petitioners  made 
several  attempts  to  have  that  measurement  effected,  but  apparently 
without  success  ;  and  that  up  to  December,  1847,  neither  they  or 
any  one  else  pretended  that  the  order  of  March  23d,  1844,  was 
not  the  last  act  of  the  Government  in  the  premises. 

The  parol  testimony  offered  to  prove  that  a  grant  issued  will  be 
briefly  adverted  to. 

C.  Brown  swears  that  the  Romeros  have  lived  on  the  rancho  since 
1840,  and  that  he  always  understood  they  had  a  grant.  He  does 
not  pretend  to  have  seen  it. 

James  M.  Tice  swears  that  he  has  searched  for  the  title  papers, 
but  has  been  unable  to  find  them. 

J.  J.  P.  Mesa  saw  a  bundle  of  papers  in  Romero's  hands  on  his 


224  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Romero  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

return  from  Monterey,  in  1844.  The  bundle  was  not  opened,  but 
Romero  said  thev  were  his  title  papers.  He  subsequently  saw 
Micheltorena's  order  for  the  measurement  of  the  land.  He  does 
not  pretend  to  have  seen  any  grant.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  Mesa 
was  examined  before  the  Board,  and  did  not  mention  this  circum- 
stance ;  and  that  he  can  neither  read  or  write. 

Inocencio  Romero,  who  disclaims  any  present  interest  in  the 
land,  swears  that  he  had  a  grant ;  that  he  gave  it  to  Mr.  Tingley 
to  be  presented  to  the  Board,  and  that  since  then  he  has  not  seen 
it.  He  also  states  that  the  grant  was  made  by  Micheltorena  a  short 
time  after  he  arrived  in  the  country,  and  that  Arce,  who  was  then 
his  Secretary,  delivered  it  to  him. 

The  expediente  however  shows  that  Jimeno  was  the  Secretary, 
at  least  until  March  23d,  1844.  And  as  it  is  clear  that  at  that 
date  the  grant  was  suspended  until  a  measurement  should  be  made, 
the  title  papers  seen  by  Mesa  in  the  hands  of  Romero  on  his  return 
from  Monterey  in  1844,  must  have  been  only  the  papers  now  pro- 
duced. 

The  testimony  of  Mr.  G.  B.  Tingley  is  the  only  evidence  in  the 
cause  which  approaches  proof  that  a  grant  issued.  This  witness 
swears  that  on  the  trial  of  a  suit  between  Domingo  Peralta  and  the 
Romeros,  a  grant  from  Micheltorena  to  the  latter  was  produced  in 
evidence  ;  that  the  petition  was  for  a  sobrante  ;  that  the  signatures 
were  genuine  ;  and  that  one  Sanford  took  the  papers,  and  he  has 
never  seen  them  since. 

On  his  cross  examination  he  states  that  the  papers  produced  were 
the  original  petition,  and  the  marginal  order  of  reference,  an  in- 
formation signed  by  A.  M.  Pico,  then  a  decree  of  concession,  and 
final  a  title  in  form  with  a  condition  that  the  grant  should  not  inter- 
fere with  the  adjoining  grants. 

If  these  papers  were  produced,  they  must  all,  with  the  exception 
of  the  grant,  have  been  procured  from  the  archives  ;  for  the  peti- 
tion, the  informes,  and  the  decree  of  concession  form  part  of  the 
expediente  which  remains  on  file.  That  expediente  is  in  evidence 
in  this  cause,  and  contains  no  decree  of  concession  whatever,  nor 
any  draft  or  "  borrador  "  of  the  formal  title  delivered  to  the  party, 
as  is  almost  invariably  the  case  where  such  a  document  issued  ;  on 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  225 

Romero  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

the  contrary,  the  last  order  of  the  Governor  in  effect  refuses,  as  we 
have  seen,  to  grant  the  petition  for  even  a  provisional  title  until  a 
measurement  was  made,  which  clearly  was  not  done  until  after 
December,  1847,  if  at  all  Besides,  if  all  these  papers  were  pro- 
cured from  the  archives  and  were  delivered  to  Sandford,  how  does 
it  happen  that  only  a  part  of  them  were  restored  to  the  archives, 
and  are  now  produced  ? 

Jos^  Ramon  Mesa,  a  w^itness  produced  on  the  part  of  the  United 
States,  testifies  that  he  was  present  at  the  trial  of  the  suit  referred 
to  by  Mr.  Tingley  ;  that  no  formal  title  was  produced  by  the 
Romeros,  but  only  a  provisional  license  to  occupy,  subject  to  the 
boundaries  of  the  neighboring  proprietors,  during  the  pendency  of 
the  proceedings  to  obtain  a  title.  The  witness  further  swore,  that 
he  heard  Inocencio  Romero  state  to  Domingo  Peralta,  in  reply  to 
an  inquiry  as  to  what  title  he  had,  that  he  had  no  title  ;  that  all  he 
had  was  a  provisional  license.  That  on  several  occasions  he  heard 
Garcia  say  that  he  had  no  title  ;  and  that  he  had  intended  to  take 
steps  to  get  one,  but  that  all  he  had  was  a  "  provisional  license." 

This  provisional  license  is  in  all  probability  the  order  made  by 
John  Burton,  Justice  of  the  Peace,  in  April,  1847,  on  the  margin 
of  the  Governor's  order  of  March  23d,  1844,  for  the  measurement 
of  the  land,  and  was  in  compliance  with  Romero's  petition  to  him 
of  the  thirty-first  of  March,  1847.  The  Justice  of  the  Peace 
directs  that  "  the  interested  party  will  proceed  to  take  possession  of 
the  land  according  to  the  order  of  the  Government,"  &c.  As  a 
copy  of  Jimeno's  order  with  this  marginal  entry  of  Burton's  appears 
to  have  been  furnished  to  Romero,  and  by  him  sent  to  Garcia,  it  is 
in  all  probability  the  "  license  "  referred  to.  It  will  not  be  pre- 
tended that  any  rights  could  be  conferred  by  such  an  order  of  an 
American  Justice  of  the  Peace  in  April,  1847. 

The  record  of  the  suit  between  Peralta  and  the  Romeros  has 
been  produced.  It  contains  no  evidence  whatever  even  tending  to 
show  that  a  grant  was  produced  at  the  trial. 

Antonio  M.  Pico,  a  witness  produced  by  the  claimants,  swears 
that  he  received  an  order  from  the  Governor  to  put  the  coterminous 
neighbors,  Pacheco  and  Moraga,  into  possession  of  their  land,  and 
to  measure  the  same  for  the  purpose  of  separating  them  from  those 


226  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Eomero  ct  al.  v.  United  States. 

of  the  Romeros  ;  that  he  was  directed  by  the  same  order  to  put  the 
Romeros  m  possession  of  the  overplus  ;  that  he  summoned  the 
cohndantes,  but  they  did  not  appear ;  that  he  did  not  then  execute 
the  order,  but  repeated  the  summons  to  them  ;  that  the  Romeros 
made  a  complaint  to  the  Governor,  and  he,  the  witness,  received 
from  the  latter  a  new  order  to  carry  the  former  into  effect,  upon 
which  he  told  the  Romeros  to  go  there — which  they  did  in  1844. 
This  witness  explicitly  states  that  no  title  to  the  land  in  favor  of  the 
Romeros  was  ever  exhibited  to  him. 

The  orders  referred  to  by  Pico  are  obviously  those  contained  in 
the  expedients  The  first  order  did  not,  as  he  supposes,  direct  him 
to  put  the  Romeros  in  possession,  but  only  to  measure  the  land  and 
certify  the  result,  "  so  that  it  might  be  granted."  Romero's  com- 
plaint or  petition  to  the  Governor,  stating  the  failure  of  the  Alcalde 
to  measure  the  land,  and  asking  for  a  provisional  grant,  we  also 
find  in  the  expediente,  and  also  all  the  second  order  of  the  Gov- 
ernor, which,  like  the  former,  only  directs  the  measurement  of  the 
land — the  Governor  having,  as  we  have  seen,  adopted  Jimeno's 
recommendation  that  the  land  should  be  measured,  and  Soto  and 
Romero  should  present  themselves  before  any  grant  should  issue. 

On  the  parol  proof  alone  I  should  come  to  the  conclusion  that 
Mr.  Tingley  is  mistaken  in  supposing  that  a  grant  for  the  land  was 
ever  produced.  But  the  evidence  afforded  not  only  by  the  ex- 
pediente but  by  the  repeated  declarations  of  the  Romeros  them- 
selves in  their  various  petitions  and  in  the  conveyance  to  Garcia, 
remove  every  possible  doubt  on  the  question. 

The  facts  of  the  case  are  unmistakeable.  The  Romeros  solicited 
land  which  the  Governor  was  disposed  to  grant.  He  directed  a 
measurement  preparatory  to  making  the  grant,  and  this  measure- 
ment never  was  effected.  I  cannot  perceive  how  this  Court  can 
recognize  these  proceedings  as  giving  any  title  to  the  land.  It 
may  be  admitted  that  in  1844  they  went  upon  the  land,  as  stated 
by  Pico — though  if  so,  it  is  singular  that  John  Burton,  Alcalde, 
should  in  April,  1847,  have  ordered  "  the  interested  parties  to  pro- 
ceed to  take  possession  of  the  mentioned  lands  according  to  the 
order  of  the  Government." 

But  this  occupation,  not  authorized,  so  far  as  appears,  by  Gov- 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  227 

Palmer  ct  al.  v.  United  States. 

ernment,  and  only  made  in  pursuance  of  a  verbal  permission  of 
Pico,  and  without  the  measurement  of  the  land  as  required  by  both 
orders  of  Micheltorena,  can  hardly  be  deemed  to  have  conferred 
any  title,  either  legal  or  equitable,  upon  the  claimants. 

The  case  is,  perhaps,  a  hard  one  ;  for  there  seems  no  reason  to 
suppose  that  the  grant  would  have  been  refused,  if  the  measure- 
ment had  been  made,  and  Soto's  rights  had  been  found  to  have 
been  forfeited.  But  no  grant,  either  perfect  or  inchoate,  was  made, 
nor  any  promise  given  that  one  should  be  made. 

The  petitions  were  favorably  received,  a  provisional  grant  re- 
fused, and  a  measurement  directed.  There  the  action  of  the 
Government  ended ;  and  certainly  such  proceedings  did  not  confer 
such  a  right  of  property  in  the  land  as  this  Court  can  recognize. 

The  claim  must  be  rejected. 


JOSEPH  C.  PALMER  et  al,  claiming  the  Rancho  Punta 
DE  LoBOS,  Appellants,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

The  fact  that  the  Circuit  and  District  Courts  are  simultaneously  in  session,  is  not 
sufficient  cause  for  the  continuance  of  a  land  case. 

This  was  a  motion  by  claimants  to  set  the  cause  for  hearing. 

E.  L.  Go  OLD,  for  the  motion. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  against  it. 

Since  the  dehvery  of  the  opinion  of  the  Court  on  the  motion 
made  August  3d  by  the  counsel  for  claimants,  that  the  cause  be 
brought  to  a  hearing,  the  District  Attorney  showed  cause  on  the 
tenth  day  of  August  for  a  continuance.  The  showing,  though  not 
strictly  within  the  rules  usually  apphed  to  such  cases,  was  treated 
by  the  Court  as  sufficient,  and  four  weeks  further  time,  the  period 
asked  for  by  the  District  Attorney,  was  allowed.  Monday,  Sept. 
7th,  being  a  hoUday,  the  Court  was  not  in  session,  and  on  last  Mon- 


228  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

day,  Sept.  14tli,  the  claimants'  counsel  again  moved  the  hearing  of 
the  cause.  JSTo  cause  for  a  continuance  was  shown  by  the  District 
Attorney.  He  did  not  intimate  that  he  expected,  within  any  as- 
signed period,  to  obtain  testimony  on  the  part  of  Government,  nor 
that  he  was  in  possession  of  any  facts  susceptible  of  proof  which 
might  affect  the  case.  He,  however,  urgently  pressed  upon  the 
attention  of  the  Court  that  he  was  in  daily  attendance  upon  the 
Circuit  Court  now  in  session,  and  desired  that  this  cause  should  be 
postponed  until  the  next  regular  call  of  the  docket  of  land  cases. 
He  further  urged  that  the  law  did  not  contemplate  that  both  the 
Circuit  and  District  Courts  should  be  in  session  at  the  same  time, 
and  that  the  Government  could  not  be  expected  to  provide  two 
officers  to  be  in  attendance  upon  the  Courts  when  their  holding  their 
sessions  at  the  same  time  was  not  contemplated  by  law. 

As  to  these  suggestions,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  Act  of  1855, 
which  authorizes  the  Circuit  Judge  to  form  part  of  and  preside 
over  the  District  Court  when  hearing  land  cases,  requires  him  so  to 
do  only  "  when  in  his  opinion  the  business  of  his  own  Court  will 
permit,"  clearly  implying  that  the  Legislature  contemplated  that 
both  Courts  might  be  in  session  simultaneously.  And  in  the  fee-bill 
of  1853  the  Marshal  is  in  terms  allowed  a  per  diem  for  attending 
the  Circuit  and  District  Courts  "  when  they  are  both  in  session,  or 
for  attending  either  of  said  Courts  when  but  one  is  in  session."  It 
cannot  therefore  be  said  that  simultaneous  sessions  of  both  Courts 
are  not  contemplated  by  law. 

But  the  exercise  of  the  discretion  of  the  Court  as  to  continuing 
this  cause  does  not  depend  upon  technical  considerations  such  as 
this.  The  Court  has  already  intimated  to  the  District  Attorney 
that  it  would  suspend  for  the  present,  while  his  engagements  con- 
tinued imperative,  the  regular  call  of  the  docket  of  land  cases. 
This,  though  a  great  hardship  to  claimants,  seemed  unavoidable,  as 
they  could  not  reasonably  expect  the  District  Attorney  to  prepare 
for  hearing  a  certain  number  of  new  cases,  when  his  duties  in  the 
Circuit  Court  engrossed  his  whole  time. 

But  the  case  at  bar  has  already  been  regularly  called,  and  has 
been,  from  May  6th,  set  for  a  hearing  seven  different  times.  On 
the  fifteenth  of  June,  six  weeks  further  time  was  allowed  to  the 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  229 


Palmer  ct  al.  v.  United  States. 


District  Attorney.  At  the  expiration  of  that  period  he  was  again 
allowed  four  weeks  further  time,  though  the  application  was  strenu- 
ously opposed  by  the  claimants,  and  now,  without  any  showing  other 
than  that  he  is  engaged  in  the  Circuit  Court,  an  indefinite  post- 
ponement is  asked  until  the  next  call  of  the  calendar.  This  post- 
ponement is  not  asked  because  the  District  Attorney  is  unable  to 
appear  and  argue  the  cause  in  Court,  for  no  desire  to  argue  the 
cause  orally  was  intimated,  and  the  general  practice  has  been  to 
submit  these  cases  on  written  briefs.  If,  however,  an  oral  argument 
be  desired,  the  Court  will  assign  a  day  when  the  District  Attorney 
is  not  in  actual  attendance  on  the  Circuit  Court.  A  convenient 
time  for  filing  briefs  will  of  course  be  allowed.  The  real  object  of 
the  motion  is  to  postpone  the  submission  and  to  keep  it  open  for 
further  proofs.  I  think  the  claimants  have  a  right  to  insist  that 
their  cause  be  heard,  especially  as  no  testimony  whatsoever,  on  the 
part  of  the  United  States,  has  been  taken  since  the  cause  has  been 
in  this  Court,  and  there  seems  no  reason  to  suppose  that  at  the  ex- 
piration of  a  month  from  this  date  the  Government  will  be  more 
ready  to  submit  the  case  than  it  was  a  month  ago. 

So  many  cases  are  already  before  this  Court  for  determination, 
requiring  minute  and  careful  investigation,  that  it  is  not  probable 
that  this  cause  will  be  taken  up  by  the  Court  and  finally  disposed 
of  before  the  expiration  of  a  considerable  time. 

If  at  any  time  before  the  entry  of  the  final  decree,  new  matter 
should  be  brought  to  light  or  testimony  be  newly  discovered,  it  will 
of  course  be  in  the  power  of  the  District  Attorney  to  move  that  the 
cause  be  reopened  for  the  purpose  of  hearing  it. 

The  Court  has  felt  the  utmost  reluctance  in  refusing  this  applica- 
tion. We  would  have  much  preferred  that  a  cause  involving  so 
great  an  amount  should  be  heard  only  when  both  sides  announce 
themselves  in  readiness.  But  we  have  felt  that  the  claimants  have 
rights  as  well  as  the  Government,  and  that  under  all  the  circum- 
stances we  are  not  at  liberty  to  grant  the  continuance  asked  for. 

The  cause  must  therefore  be  set  for  argument  on  Saturday,  Sept. 
29th,  at  the  opening  of  Court  on  that  day,  and  if  no  oral  argument 
be  desired,  it  will  be  considered  as  submitted  with  liberty  to  either 
side  to  file  briefs. 


230  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Swat  V.  United  States. 

GEORGE   SWAT,  claiming  the  Rancho  Nueva  Flandria, 
Appellant,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

Where  a  claimant  for  land  has  presented  liis  petition  to  the  Board  of  Land  Com- 
missioners, but  has  neglected  to  support  it  by  evidence  within  two  years  there- 
after, such  neglect  does  not  bring  the  claim  within  the  limitation  prescribed 
in  the  thirteenth  section  of  the  Act  of  March  3d,  1851. 

Whether  this  Court  can  proceed  to  decide  such  claim  solely  on  evidence  taken  by 
its  order,  left  an  open  question. 

The  claim  rejected  as  fraudulent. 

Claim  for  three  leagues  of  land  on  the  Sacramento  river,  re- 
jected bj  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimant. 

E.  0.  Crosby,  for  Appellant. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  and  Peyton  & 
DuER,  for  Appellees. 

The  petition  in  this  case  was  presented  to  the  Board  February 
28th,  1853.  No  evidence  whatever,  either  oral  or  documentary, 
was  introduced  by  the  claimant  before  the  Board,  and  the  claim 
was  accordingly  rejected,  March  27th,  1855. 

The  original  documents  on  which  the  claim  is  founded,  as  well  as 
the  oral  testimony  in  support  of  them,  are  for  the  first  time  submitted 
to  this  Court,  under  its  general  rules  authorizing  "  further  testi- 
mony "  to  be  taken  in  this  class  of  cases. 

It  may  well  be  doubted  whether  the  claimant  has  not,  according 
to  the  letter  as  well  as  the  spirit  of  the  Act  of  1851,  forfeited  what- 
ever rights  he  had  to  the  land  now  claimed  by  him.  The  eighth 
section  of  that  act  requires  "  all  persons  claiming  lands  by  virtue  of 
any  right  or  title  derived  from  the  Mexican  or  Spanish  Govern- 
ments, to  present  the  same  to  the  Commissioners,  together  with 
such  documentary  evidence  and  testimony  of  witnesses  as  the  claim- 
ant relies  on  to  support  his  claim." 

When  the  decision  of  the  Board  comes  up  for  review  in  this 
Court,  the  tenth  section  requires  a  decree  to  be  rendered  "  on  the 
pleadings  and  evidence,  and  on  such  further  evidence  as  may  be 
taken  by  order  of  this  Court."     The  thirteenth  section  provides 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  231 

Swat  V.  United  States. 

that  all  lands  the  claims  to  which  shall  not  have  been  presented  to 
the  Board  within  two  years  after  the  date  of  the  act,  shall  be  con- 
sidered public  lands,  etc. 

The  first  question  to  be  considered  is — was  this  claim  "  pre- 
sented "  to  the  Commissioners  within  the  provisions  of  the  eighth 
and  thirteenth  sections  ?  If  not,  it  is  barred,  and  the  land  must 
be  deemed  to  be  part  of  the  public  domain.  The  eighth  section  re- 
quires, as  we  have  seen,  that  a  party  claiming  land  under  any 
right  or  title  derived  from  the  Mexican  or  Spanish  Governments 
shall  present  the  "  same."  This  Avould,  in  strict  grammatical  con- 
struction, be  taken  to  mean  the  "  right  or  title  "  previously  men- 
tioned. But  it  cannot  mean  the  grant  itself,  for  the  statute  pro- 
ceeds to  say  "  together  with  the  documentary  evidence  and  testimony 
of  witnesses  "  on  which  he  rehes.  He  is  thus  required  to  present 
both  his  title  or  right  and  also  the  documentary  evidence  of  it.  If 
then  he  has  presented  a  petition,  claiming  the  land,  he  would  seem 
to  have  complied  with  one  of  the  requirements  of  the  law. 

The  thirteenth  section  in  effect  bars  all  claims  which  shall  not 
have  been  presented  within  the  two  years  prescribed.  But  as 
section  eight  evidently,  discriminates  between  the  claim  and  the 
documentary  evidence  in  support  of  it,  it  would  seem  that  the 
omission  to  present  the  latter  would  not,"  within  the  thirteenth 
section,  constitute  an  omission  to  present  the  former.  I  think, 
therefore,  that  the  "  claim  "  was  presented  within  the  period  limited 
by  the  statute,  and  that  the  Board  would  have  been  authorized  to 
receive  evidence  in  support  of  it,  though  offered  after  the  expiration 
of  the  two  years. 

The  second  and  more  difficult  question  is — can  this  Court  pro- 
ceed to  decide  this  claim  upon  the  evidence  taken  in  this  Court, 
none  whatever  having  been  submitted  to  the  Board  ? 

If  this  evidence  is  properly  before  the  Court,  the  case  must  be 
determined  upon  it.  The  inquiry  then  is — does  the  law  or  the  rule 
of  Court  in  pursuance  of  it  authorize  evidence  to  be  taken  in  this 
Court  where  none  has  been  taken  by  the  Board  ? 

The  language  of  the  tenth  section  is,  "  the  Court  shall  proceed 
to  render  judgment  upon  the  pleadings  and  evidence  in  the  case, 
and  upon  such  further  evidence  as  may  be  taken  by  its  order." 


232  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Swat  V.  United  States. 

The  term  "further"  seems  to  indica^te  that  the  evidence  ordered 
to  be  taken  shall  be  additional  evidence,  and  that  some  evidence 
shall  already  have  been  taken.  The  rule  of  Court  provides,  not 
that  the  party  shall  be  allowed  to  produce  testimony  in  the  case, 
but  that  he  may  take  additional  testimony  ;  and  certainly  both 
Congress  and  the  Court  contemplated  that  such  additional  testimony 
should  be  taken  to  supply  defects  and  omissions,  to  corroborate  or 
rebut,  and  not  that  it  should  constitute  the  whole  proofs  in  the  case. 

It  is  clear  from  all  the  provisions  of  the  act,  that  the  jurisdiction 
intended  to  be  conferred  on  this  Court  was  in  its  nature  an  appel- 
late jurisdiction,  or  a  power  to  review  the  decisions  of  the  Board. 
The  case  as  presented  to  the  Board  is  to  be  reviewed  in  this  Court, 
and  the  decision  is  to  be  rendered  upon  the  evidence  submitted  to 
the  Board,  and  such  farther  testimony  as  the  Court  may  order. 
But  if  the  claimant,  disregarding  the  positive  requirements  of  the 
eighth  section,  is  permitted  to  withhold  all  his  evidence,  both  oral 
and  documentary,  until  he  reaches  this  Court,  the  functions  of  this 
Court  become  in  effect  original  and  not  appellate. 

In  cases  of  appeal  from  the  District  to  the  Circuit  Courts  in  Ad- 
miralty, additional  testimony  may  be  taken  in  the  latter  Court.  But 
if  a  libel  were  filed  in  the  District  Court,  no  testimony  whatever 
offered  in  support  of  it,  and  thereupon  dismissed,  the  libellant  would 
hardly  be  allowed  in  the  Circuit  Court,  for  the  first  time,  to  enter 
upon  his  proofs.  If  such  a  proceeding  v^ere  permitted,  it  would  be 
easy  to  evade  the  provisions  of  law  which  give  to  the  District  Court 
exclusive  original  cognizance  of  admiralty  suits,  and  to  the  Circuit 
Courts  only  an  appellate  jurisdiction. 

But  the  jurisdiction  of  this  Court  in  land  cases,  though  called  an 
appellate  jurisdiction,  and  though  the  proceeding  by  which  the  de- 
cision of  the  Board  is  reviewed  is  spoken  of  as  "  an  appeal,"  and 
though  bearing  a  close  analogy  to  an  appeal  in  admiralty  or  equity 
suits,  has  yet  been  decided  to  be  an  original  proceeding ;  the  re- 
moval of  the  transcript  of  the  papers  and  evidence  into  this  Court 
"  being  but  a  mode  of  providing  for  the  institution  of  suit  in  this 
Court."      United  States  v.  Ritchie^  17  How.  534. 

It  is  to  be  remembered,  however,  that  this  view  of  the  nature  of 
the  proceeding  in  this  Court  w^as  taken  by  the  Supreme  Court  to 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  238 

SAvat  V.  United  States. 

meet  the  objection  that  the  law  authorizing  an  "  appeal "  from  the 
decision  of  the  Board  was  unconstitutional.  The  latter  not  being 
"  a  Court "  under  the  Constitution,  the  case  when  presented  to  the 
District  Court  becomes  for  the  first  time  a  suit  or  case  before  a 
''  Court,"  and  in  this  sense  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Court  was  said  to 
be  original.  But  the  mode  of  exercising  that  jurisdiction  is  exactly 
analogous  to  the  mode  of  exercising  an  appellate  jurisdiction,  and 
the  proceeding  is  practically,  though  not  technically,  an  appeal. 
When,  therefore.  Congress  has  directed  that  this  case  shall  be  de- 
termined upon  evidence  taken  before  another  tribunal,  not  a  Court, 
but  certified  up  to  this  Court  to  be  used  as  evidence,  and  also  on 
further  evidence  to  be  taken  by  order  of  this  Court,  the  question 
still  recurs  whether  this  Court  can,  where  no  testimony  has  been 
certified  to  it,  permit  all  the  testimony  on  which  its  decision  is  to 
be  founded  to  be  taken  as  "  further  testimony." 

The  answer  to  this  question  depends  on  the  force  we  attach  to 
the  word  "  further."  If  the  construction  contended  for  by  the 
United  States  be  adopted,  the  Court  would  still  be  at  liberty  to 
order  further  testimony  to  be  taken  in  all  cases  where  mii/  testi- 
mony whatever  had  been  taken  by  either  side  before  the  Board. 
Suppose  then,  that  the  testimony  so  taken  by  a  claimant  is  wholly 
irrelevant,  or  immaterial,  or  even  adverse  to  him,  shall  he  be  in  a 
better  position  in  this  Court  than  one  who  by  accident  or  neglect  of 
agents  or  counsel  has  been  unable  or  has  omitted  to  produce  any 
testimony  ?  It  would  hardly  occur  to  the  claimant  under  such  cir- 
cumstances that  he  could  save  his  rights  in  this  Court  by  examining 
before  the  Board  a  witness  who  knew  nothing  about  his  claim,  or 
who  would  testify  that  he  had  no  title. 

Again  :  If  the  strict  and  literal  construction  of  the  term 
"  further  "  be  adopted,  it  ^night  with  some  plausibility  be  urged 
that  the  testimony  must  be  additional  to  some  testimony  already 
taken  by  the  party  seeking  to  introduce  it.  Suppose  then,  the 
United  States  have  been  wholly  unable  to  procure  any  evidence 
before  the  Board  to  estabhsh  a  suspected  fraud.  When  the  case 
is  in  this  Court  conclusive  evidence  is  for  the  first  time  discovered. 
Shall  they  be  prevented  from  introducing  it  because  they  have 
offered  no  testimony  to  the  Commissioners  ? 


234  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Swat  V.  United  States. 

It  is  unnecessary,  however,  to  pursue  this  subject  further.  On 
the  whole,  I  inchne  to  the  opinion  that  the  intention  of  Congress  was 
to  allow  testimony  on  either  side  to  be  taken  in  this  Court ;  that 
the  word  "  further  "  was  used  because  it  was  taken  for  granted  that 
the  claimants  would  in  all  cases  comply  with  the  directions  of  the 
eighth  section,  and  offer  some  testimony  to  the  Board  ;  but  that  it 
was  not  intended  to  provide  for  the  rare  and  exceptional  case  where 
they  had  totally  omitted  to  do  so,  nor  absolutely  to  restrict  the 
power  of  the  Court  to  those  cases  where  in  strictness  of  language 
the  testimony  could  be  deemed  "  further  testimony." 

In  the  present  case,  however,  it  is  not  necessary  finally  to  decide 
the  point.  It  is  to  be  considered,  therefore,  as  still  open  to  dis- 
cussion in  this  Court.  We  proceed  to  consider  the  merits  of  this 
case. 

The  title  of  the  appellant  is  claimed  under  what  is  known  as  the 
general  title  of  Micheltorena.  The  question  to  be  determined  is 
one  of  fact — Was  the  claimant  one  of  those  in  whose  favor  the 
general  title  issued  ?  The  persons  to  whom  the  Governor  authorized 
General  Sutter  to  deliver  a  copy  of  the  general  title  were  those  who 
had  petitioned  for  lands,  with  a  favorable  informe  by  the  latter, 
previous  to  December  22d,  1844,  the  date  of  the  general  title.  If 
therefore,  it  appears  that  previous  to  that  date  the  claimant  had 
petitioned  for  his  land,  procured  a  favorable  informe  from  Sutter, 
and  obtained  a  copy  of  the  general  title  from  him,  he  is,  according 
to  the  ruling  of  this  Court,  entitled  to  a  confirmation  of  his  claim. 

In  support  of  his  claim  an  original  petition  to  Governor  Michel- 
torena, dated  November  13th,  1844,  is  produced,  with  a  marginal 
informe  by  Gen.  Sutter  of  the  same  date,  together  with  a  copy  of 
the  general  title,  and  a  certificate  signed  by  Sutter  that  it  was  de- 
livered to  Juan  de  Swat  on  the  twenty-fifth  of  April,  1845. 

It  is  contended  that  no  petition  was  ever  presented  to  the  Gov- 
ernor ;  that  the  petition  now  produced  w^as  made  November  3d, 
1845 ;  that  its  date  has  been  altered  to  November  13th,  1844, 
and  the  favorable  informe  of  Gen.  Sutter,  dated  November  13th, 
1844,  recently  written  in  the  margin. 

The  present  claimant  is  the  brother  and  heir  of  Juan  de  Swat, 
the  alleged  original  grantee.     During  his  lifetime  Juan  de  Swat 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  235 

Swat  V.  United  States. 

conveyed  his  interest  in  a  part  of  the  lands  to  Warner,  by  whom  a 
claim  was  presented  to  the  Board  through  his  attorneys  Messrs. 
Kewen  &  Morrison.  It  is  shown  that  Juan  de  Swat  dehvered  to 
Warner  his  title  papers.  And  copies  of  the  papers  as  presented  in 
the  Warner  case  are  in  evidence  in  this  cause.  Mr.  Morrison,  one 
of  the  attorneys  of  Warner,  testifies  that  he  had  in  his  possession 
the  original  papers  in  the  case,  viz  :  the  petition  of  Swat  to  the 
Alcalde,  De  la  Rosa,  with  the  marginal  indorsements  of  that  officer 
and  of  Sutter,  the  petition  to  the  Governor  and  the  map  accom- 
panying it.  That  he  delivered  all  these  papers  to  Mr.  Crosby,  the 
attorney  for  the  present  claimant.  It  is  also  shown  that  Swat 
himself  stated  that  Messrs.  Kewen  &  Morrison  had  his  original 
papers,  which  is  further  corroborated  by  the  fact  that  Swat  and 
Warner  conveyed  to  Kewen  &  White  an  interest  in  part  of  the 
land  as  a  compensation  for  their  professional  services.  A  copy  of 
the  petition  to  the  Governor  is  produced  and  admitted  to  be  in  the 
handwriting  of  Mr.  Kewen.  This  copy  was  delivered  with  the 
other  papers  to  Mr.  Crosby  by  Mr.  Morrison. 

On  examining  the  copies  of  the  papers  filed  in  the  Wjarner  case, 
the  originals  of  which  were,  as  has  been  stated,  delivered  to  Mr. 
Crosby  after  the  Warner  case  was  rejected  and  abandoned,  we  find 
them  to  correspond  in  every  respect  with  the  papers  now  produced, 
except  in  three  vital  particulars:  The  map  has  no  date,  while  that 
now  produced  has  the  figures  "1844"  upon  it.  The  petition  to 
the  Governor  is  dated  November  3d,  1845,  instead  of  November 
13th,  1844  ;  and  there  is  no  favorable  informe  of  General  Sutter 
on  its  margin. 

That  a  map  without  the  date  of  1844,  that  a  petition  to  the  Gov- 
ernor dated  November  3d,  1845,  and  having  no  marginal  informe 
by  Sutter,  were  presented  in  the  Warner  case,  cannot  be  doubted ; 
and  that  those  papers  were  dehvered  to  Mr.  Crosby,  is  equally 
clear.  If  the  papers  now  produced  be  not  those  papers  which  have 
since  been  altered,  where  are  they  ?  And  whence  have  the  papers 
now  produced  been  obtained  ? 

No  explanation  on  these  points  is  offered  on  the  part  of  the  claim- 
ant, nor  is  any  reason  suggested  why  Warner  &  Swat,  who  are 
shown  to  have  given  the  papers  to  Messrs.  Kewen  k  Morrison, 
16 


236  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Swat  V.  United  States. 

should  have  withheld  from  them  the  only  papers  by  which  the  claim 
could  be  estabhshed.  That  Messrs.  Kewen  &  Morrison  had  no 
papers  bearing  the  dates  of  those  now  presented  is  clear  ;  and  the 
copy  of  the  petition  to  the  Governor  made  by  Mr.  Kewen  and 
handed  with  the  other  papers  to  Mr.  Crosby,  is  dated  like  that  filed 
in  the  Warner  case,  November  3d,  1845,  and  not  November  18th, 
1844. 

On  examining  the  petition  now  produced  we  recognize  the  facility 
with  which  an  alteration  of  its  date  could  be  made.  Numerous 
experts  have  testified  that  they  discover  the  marks  of  the  supposed 
alteration  by  ihQ  insertion  of  the  figure  one  before  the  three  in  the 
date  of  the  day,  and  the  change  of.  the  number  of  the  year  from 
1845  to  1844.  I  cannot  say  that  I  have  been  able  myself  to  de- 
tect these  alterations,  although  there  is  evidently  something  unnat- 
ural in  the  appearance  of  the  figures,  which  suggests,  the  possibility 
of  their  having  been  changed.  One  indication  is  extremely  sus- 
picious, the  ordinary  Eng'lish  afiix  ''  ^/i "  is  placed  after  and  above 
the  figures  "  13,"  which  certainly  would  not  have  been  done  by  a 
person  writing  a  document  in  Spanish. 

But  the  moral  evidence  afforded  by  the  circumstances  of  this 
case  is  stronger  than  any  furnished  by  the  mere  appearance  of  the 
documents. 

Before  we  can  believe  the  petition  now  presented  to  be  genuine, 
we  must  suppose  that  two  petitions  to  the  Governor  were  drawn, 
the  one  dated  November  13th,  1844,  the  other  November  3d, 
1845.  That  they  were  not  merely  similar  in  purport  but  identical 
in  every  particular,  except  the  date.  That  when  the  title  papers 
were  furnished  to  counsel  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  the  claim, 
only  one  of  them  was  delivered  with  the  other  papers ;  that  the 
other,  on  which  alone  the  claim  could  be  substantiated,  was  with- 
held. That  neither  they  suspected,  nor  their  clients  advised  them 
during  the  whole  proceeding,  of  the  existence  of  any  other  petition 
than  that  furnished.  That  the  second  petition  has  recently,  and 
after  the  cause  had  been  pending  two  years  before  the  Board,  and 
after  the  claim  had  been  rejected,  been  suddenly  produced  we 
know  not  whence,  while  the  first  petition  has  disappeared  we  know 
not  whither  ;  and,  finally,  that  the  unfortunate  coincidence  has  oc- 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  237 

Swiit  ?;.  United  Slates. 

curred  that  the  second  petition  presents,  if  not  immistakeable  marks 
of  alteration,  at  least  an  equivocal  and  suspicious  appearance. 

A  series  of  suppositions  so  improbable  .and  extravagant  cannot, 
without  the  clearest  proof,  be  entertained.  The  testimony  of  Mr. 
Bidwell  is  rehed  on  by  the  claimant  to  explain  some  of  the  circum- 
stances of  the  case.  But  the  evidence  of  this  witness  tends  to 
corroborate  rather  than  to  weaken  our  suspicions.  It  is  clear  from 
his  statements  that  in  "the  fall  of  1845,  or  spring  of  1846,  he  did 
prepare  a  petition  and  map  for  Swat,  but  was  evidently  prevented 
from  presenting  them  to  the  Governor.  But  the  previous  petition 
of  November,  13th,  1844,  he  cannot  recollect.  That  purporting  to 
bear  that  date  he  recognizes  as  in  his  handwriting,  and  he  presumes 
from  its  date  and  from  the  date  of  the  map,  that  he  drew  it  at  the 
time  it  bears  date.  His  opinion  is  thus  derived  entirely  from  the 
date  of  the  documents,  and  the  question  whether  those  dates  have 
been  altered  is  the  very  point  in  controversy. 

But,  in  addition,  it  is  admitted  that  on  the  seventh  of  October, 
1845,  Swat  petitioned  the  Alcalde  of  Sonoma  for  permission  to 
occupy  the  land  in  question  for  the  security  of  his  cattle  and  horses. 
That  this  petition  was  referred  to  Gen.  Sutter,  who  reported  on  the 
thirty-first  of  October,  1845,  that  the  land  was  vacant.  And  yet 
if  the  documents  now  produced  are  genuine,  he  had  on  the  thir- 
teenth of  November  preceding  petitioned  the  Governor  for  the 
same  land,  with  a  favorable  report  by  Sutter,  and  the  latter  had, 
as  authorized  by  the  general  title,  delivered  to  him  a  copy  of  that 
document  on  the  twenty-fifth  of  April,  1845.  At  the  very  time  then 
at  which  he  asks  for  permission  to  occupy  a  piece  of  land  for  the  se- 
curity of  his  cattle,  and  at  which  Sutter  certifies  that  it  is  vacant, 
and  for  six  months  previously,  he  had  received  from  Sutter  himself 
what  was  then  regarded  and  what  has  since  been  considered  by  this 
Court  as  a  good  title  to  the  land. 

Again :  If  at  the  tirne  the  petition  of  1845  was  drawn,  Swat 
had  already  presented  a  precisely  similar  petition,  with  a  favorable 
report  of  Sutter,  on  which  the  latter  had  given  him  a  copy  of  the 
general  title,  those  papers  must  have  been  in  his  possession.  It  is 
certainly  surprising  that  Mr.  Bidwell,  who  was  conversant  with  the 
mode  of  obtaining  grants,  should  have  totally  forgotten  such  im- 


238  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Swat  V.  United  States. 

portant  documents,  and  should,  when  drawing  the  petition  of  1845, 
have  omitted  all  mention  of  the  previous  petition  of  1844,  drawn  by 
himself,  on  which  was  written  Sutter's  favorable  report,  and  on 
which  Swat  had  already  obtained  a  copy  of  the  general  title.  That 
it  must  have  been  before  him  when  he  drew  the  petition  of  1845  is 
evident  from  the  fact  that  the  one  is  a  literal  transcript  of  the 
other,  and  that  they  only  differ  in  their  dates. 

If  the  object  of  the  second  petition  of  Swat  was  merely  to  pro- 
cure the  "  extension  of  his  title  in  proper  form,"  as  promised  in  the 
general  title  of  Micheltorena,  the  nature  of  the  application  was 
essentially  different  from  an  ordinary  petition  for  lands  ;  and  yet  in 
his  second  petition  he  merely  asks  for  "  the  vacant  land  "  on  the 
Sacramento  river,  and  gives  its  boundaries,  etc.,  in  the  usual  form, 
while  he  wholly  omits  to  mention  the  facts  which  constituted  the 
foundation  of  his  application.  It  is  not  conceivable  that  Mr.  Bid- 
well  should,  under  such  circumstances,  have  contented  himself  with 
copying  the  first  petition,  and  should  now  have  lost  all  recollection 
of  so  singular  a  proceeding.  If  to  all  these  considerations  be  added 
the  facts  that  the  petition  of  the  present  claimant  to  the  Board 
omits  to  mention  the  date  of  the  petition  to  the  Governor,  or 
Sutter's  favorable  report  upon  it ;  that  no  one  of  the  numerous  at- 
torneys who  have  been  concerned  in  the  case,  or  of  the  persons  who 
have  examined  the  papers,  has  ever  seen  such  papers  as  are  now 
produced ;  that  if  this  petition  be  not  the  petition  of  1845,  with  its 
date  altered,  that  paper  has  suddenly  and  unaccountably  disap- 
peared simultaneously  with  the  equally  unexplained  appearance  of 
the  present  petition;  that  Swat  repeatedly  declared  to  numerous, 
witnesses  that  his  title  consisted  of  the  "  Alcalde  papers,  and  that 
he  had  been  too  late  in  his  application  to  the  Governor  ";  and, 
finally,  that  the  present  claimant,  in  a  deed  dated  July,  1855,  re- 
fers to  the  petition  of  Swat  to  the  Governor  as  made  on  November 
3d,  1845,  showing  that  even  so  late  as  1855  the  existence  of  the 
petition  of  1844  was  wholly  unknown  to  him, — the  conclusion  is 
irresistible,  that  no  petition  dated  November  13th,  1844,  was 
ever  presented  to  the  Governor  or  prepared  by  Bid  well,  and 
that  the  document  now  presented  is  the  petition  of  November  3d, 
1845,  the  date  of  which  has   been  fraudulently  altered,  and  on 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  239 

United  States  v.  Enriglit. 

which  the  marginal  endorsement  of  Gen.  Sutter  has  since  been 
written. 

There  is  some  testimony  which  would,  if  admitted,  confirm  this 
view  of  the  facts.  I  have  not  thought  it  necessary,  however,  to 
decide  upon  the  question  of  its  admissibility,  for  upon  the  evidence 
above  referred  to  I  entertain  no  doubt  as  to  the  facts  of  the  case. 

The  claim  must  be  rejected. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  JAMES  ENRIGHT, 
CLAIMING  A  Tract  of  Land  in  Santa  Clara  county,  two 

THOUSAND    VARAS    SQUARE. 

An  inchoate  title,  followed  by  juridical  possession,  presents  an  equity  Avhich  the 
United  States  are  bound  to  respect. 

This  claim  was  confirmed  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the 
United  States. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellants. 

J.  B.  Crockett,  for  Appellee. 

The  documentary  evidence  of  title  exhibited  by  the  claimant  in 
this  case  is  as  follows  :  a  petition  to  the  Governor  dated  Dec.  20th, 
1844  ;  a  marginal  decree  or  order  for  information  by  the  Governor, 
and  a  favorable  report  by  the  Secretary,  Manuel  Jimeno.  On 
receiving  this  report,  the  Governor  makes  the  following  decree. 
"  January  6th,  1845.  Granted  as  asked  for  and  reported  by  the 
most  Reverend  Father  Minister.     Micheltorena." 

The  claimant  has  also  produced  a  record  of  judicial  possession, 
which  seems  to  have  been  formally  given  him  by  the  Constitutional 
Judge  of  First  Instance  of  the  Pueblo  of  San  Jose  Guadalupe  on 
the  eighteenth  of  February,  1846. 

It  is  objected  that  these  documents  are  insufficient  to  vest  any 
title,  either  legal   or   equitable,   in   the   claimant.     It   must  be 


240  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Enright. 

admitted  that  the  concession  in  this  case  is  not  the  final  documento 
or  title  which,  by  the  eighth  article  of  the  regulations,  the  Governor 
was  authorized  to  issue  when  the  definitive  concession  was  made. 

In  Arguello  v.  The  United  States,  (18  How.  543)  the  Supreme 
Court,  after  alluding  to  the  ''  informes  "  usually  required,  says : 
Ey  the  fourth  section,  the  Governor  being  thus  informed  may 
'  accede  or  not '  to  the  petition.  This  was  done  in  two  ways  : 
sometimes  he  expressed  his  consent  by  merely  VvTiting  the  word 
'  concedo '  at  the  bottom  of  the  expediente  ;  at  other  times  it  was 
expressed  with  more  formality,  as  in  the  present  case.  *  *  It  is 
intended  merely  to  show  that  the  Governor  has  '  acceded  '  to  the 
request  of  the  applicant,  and  as  an  order  for  a  patent  or  definitive 
title  in  due  form  to  be  drawn  out  for  execution.  It  is  not  itself 
such  a  document  as  is  required  by  the  eighth  section,  which  directs 
that  the  definitive  grant  asked  for  being  made,  a  document  signed 
by  the  Governor  shall  be  given  to  serve  as  a  title  to  the  parties 
interested." 

But  this  concession,  although  not  the  final  title  which  issued 
under  the  eighth  article,  is  nevertheless  a  grant.  The  words  of  the 
grant  are  positive  and  plain  ;  and  though  shorter  and  more  informal 
than  the  usual  decree  of  concession,  commencing  with  the  words 
"  vista  la  peticion,"  it  is  in  all  respects  as  effectual  to  constitute  an 
inchoate  or  imperfect  title. 

It  has  always  been  held  by  this  Court,  that  according  to  the  pro- 
visions of  the  Regulations  the  formal  or  definitive  title  contemplated 
by  the  eighth  article  could  not  issue  until  after  the  concession  of  the 
Governor  had  been  approved  by  the  Departmental  Assembly ;  and 
that  though  the  practice  of  issuing  that  document  in  advance  of 
such  approval,  and  in  terms  ''  subject  to  it,"  obtained  to  a  con- 
siderable extent,  yet  such  a  document,  where  no  approval  had 
been  obtained,  constituted  merely  an  inceptive  or  equitable  title. 
Whether  this  latter  view  be  correct  or  not,  no  doubt  can  be  enter- 
tained that  the  first  decree  of  concession,  whether  made  in  the  more 
formal  manner  usually  observed  or,  as  in  the  present  case,  by  the 
short  declaration  that  the  land  was  ''  granted  as  asked  for,"  afforded 
the  basis  for  the  Departmental  Assembly,  whose  ajoprobation  was 
necessary  to  perfect  or  give  "  definitive  validity  "  to  the  title. 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  241 

United  States  v.  Enrig-lit. 

When  therefore  it  appears  that  this  inceptive  title  has  been  de- 
livered to  the  party  shortly  after  its  date,  and  has  been  regarded 
by  the  judicial  officer  as  furnishing  the  requisite  authority  to  enable 
him  to  put  the  grantee  in  possession,  it  should  be  treated  as  vesting 
in  the  grantee  the  inchoate  or  equitable  title,  which  when  followed 
by  occupation  and  cultivation  ought  to  be  respected. 

There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  when  the  Governor,  after  hav- 
ing obtained  the  requisite  information,  had  acceded  to  the  petition, 
made  a  decree  of  concession,  and  ordered  the  patent  to  issue,  he 
would  have  declined  to  si2:n  the  title  in  form.     So  far  as  his  action 

o 

was  concerned  he  was  functus  officio,  except  the  merely  formal  act 
of  signing  the  final  "  documento  ;  "  and  it  may  well  be  doubted 
whether,  if  this  concession  had  been  approved  by  the  Assembly, 
he  would  have  been  at  liberty  to  withhold  from  the  party  the 
formal  evidence  of  title  which  the  eighth  article  directs  him  to 
issue  in  such  cases. 

It  is  not  explained  why  the  Governor  did  not  in  this  case  pursue 
the  more  usual  practice  of  issuing  the  final  title  "  subject  to  the 
approval  of  the  Assembly."  He  may,  perhaps,  in  strict  conform- 
ity '\vith  the  regulations,  have  withheld  it  until  the  approval  was 
obtained,  or  he  may,  according  to  the  loose  and  informal  practice  of 
the  country,  have  considered  that  for  so  small  a  piece  of  land  the 
grant  indorsed  upon  the  petition  was  sufficient  to  secure  the  rights 
of  the  apphcant.  The  concession  was  at  all  events  delivered  to  the 
grantee  ;  for  we  find  it  in  his  hands  very  soon  after  its  date,  and 
by  virtue  of  it  the  possession  was  formally  delivered  to  him. 

The  next  inquiry  is,  did  the  grantee  fulfill  the  conditions  usually 
annexed  to  the  formal  title,  and  in  consideration  of  which  it  issued  ? 

On  this  point  there  is  some  conflict  of  evidence.  After  referring 
to  the  testimony,  the  Board  in  their  opinion  say :  "  From  a 
careful  examination  of  all  the  proofs  in  the  case,  we  think  the  pre- 
ponderance of  proof  is  in  favor  of  the  claimant,  and  must  be 
regarded  as  estabhshing  the  fact  of  the  cultivation  of  the  place  by 
Garcia  from  a  period  anterior  to  the  grant  to  the  time  of  sale  to 
Enright  "  (the  present  claimant). 

We  see  no  reason  to  dissent  from  this  conclusion. 

The  remaining  question  relates  to  the  locatioii  and  extent  of  the 


242  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Noe  V.  United  States. 

land.  The  petition  describes  it  as  "  2000  "  varas  of  farming  land ; 
a  note  in  the  margin  of  the  petition  by  Pacheco  states  that  the 
petition  for  the  farming  land  is  for  8000  varas. 

Under  this  description  juridical  possession  was  given  of  a  piece  of 
land  2000  varas  square.  There  might,  perhaps,  be  some  room  to 
doubt  whether  the  land  described  in  the  petition  was  2000  varas 
square  or  2000  square  varas  ;  but  the  note  of  Pacheco,  the  con- 
struction given  to  the  concession  bj  the  Alcalde,  as  well  as  the 
natural  interpretation  of  the  words  when  properly  used,  satisfy  us 
that  the  intention  was  to  grant  a  piece  of  land  2000  varas  square, 
or  bounded  by  a  line  8000  varas  long,  taking  the  four  sides 
together,  as  stated  by  Pacheco. 

On  the  whole,  we  are  of  opinion  that  the  grantee  acquired  by  the 
concession  an  inceptive  or  inchoate  title,  which  when  followed  by 
cultivation  and  juridical  possession  constitute  an  equity  the  United 
States  are  bound  to  respect. 

The  decree  of  the  Board  must  be  affirmed. 


JAMES    NOE,    CLAIMING    THE    ISLAND    OF    THE     SaCRAMBNTO, 

Appellant,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

An  appeal  will  be  granted  on  application  made  after  the  expiration  of  the  term  at 
which  the  decree  was  rendered  ;  the  objection  that  the  Com-t  has  no  power  in 
the  premises  being  one  that  should  be  determined  by  the  Supreme  Court. 

This  was  an  application  for  an  order  granting  an  appeal  in  behalf 
of  the  United  States. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  for  the  order. 

Calhoun  Benham,  against  it.  • 

An  appeal  is  asked  for  in  this  case  by  the  District  Attorney. 
The  application  is  opposed  on  the  ground  that  the  Court  has  no 
power^  to  grant  an  appeal  after  the  expiration  of  the  term  at  which 
the  decree  has  been  rendered. 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  243 

Noe  V.  United  States. 

The  question  raised  is  important,  for  it  is  understood  that  there 
are  several  cases  in  which  decrees  were  rendered  during  the  last 
term,  and  in  which  no  appeal  was  taken  during  that  term.  By  the 
Act  of  1851,  no  period  is  expressly  mentioned  within  which  the 
appeal  must  be  taken.  The  language  of  the  tenth  section  is  : 
"The  District  Court  shall  proceed  to  render  judgment,  and  sliall^ 
on  the  application  of  the  party  against  whom  judgment  is  rendered, 
grant  an  appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court."  It  is  contended  that  the 
'word  "  appeal "  imports  ex  vi  termini  a  proceeding  taken  sedente 
curia,  or  during  the  session  of  the  Court  at  which  the  decree  ap- 
pealed from  is  rendered. 

It  was  early  decided  by  the  Supreme  Court  that  the  term 
"  appeal,"  in  the  Judiciary  Act  of  1789,  must  be  understood  in  its 
technical  sense,  expressive  of  the  civil  law  mode  of  removing  a 
cause  to  a  higher  tribunal,  and  not  in  its  popular  sense  as  descriptive 
of  appellate  jurisdiction,  without  regard  to  the  manner  in  which 
the  cause  is  transmitted  to  that  jurisdiction.  (7  Cranch,  108, 
387  ;  2  Wheat.  248.) 

The  term  "  appeal "  is  undoubtedly  used  in  the  same  sense  in 
the  Adt  of  1851,  and  denotes  the  civil  law  mode  of  transferring  a 
cause  to  a  superior  tribunal  for  a  retrial  of  the  matters  of  fact  as 
well  as  of  law,  as  distinguished  from  a  writ  of  error  by  which 
errors  in  matters  of  law  were  alone  submitted  for  revision.  The 
question  then  arises,  whether  an  "  appeal,"  according  to  the  im- 
port of  the  term  in  the  civil  law  as  it  is  used  in  the  proceedings  of 
the  courts  in  England  and  the  United  States,  whose  practice  is 
based  upon  the  rules  of  the  civil  law,  or  as  used  in  the  Acts  of  Con- 
gress, necessarily  denotes  a  proceeding  to  be  taken  in  open  Court, 
and  during  the  term  at  which  the  decree  appealed  from  is  rendered. 

By  the  Roman  law,  up  to  the  time  of  Justinian,  appeals  viva  voce 
were  allowable  on  the  day  the  sentence  wa«  pronounced.  (Cod.  de 
Appell.  7,  62,  14  ;  Dig.  49,  1,  2.)  A  little  more  time  was  given 
for  an  appeal  in  writing. 

According  to  Ulpian,  (Dig.  49,  1,  2,  sec.  11)  two  days  were 
allowed  to  one  acting  in  his  own  cause,  three  days  to  one  acting  in 
a  representative  capacity,  such  as  tutor,  curator,  &c.  But  various 
impediments  or  excuses  were  received  to  mitigate  the  rigor  of  this 


244  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Noe  V.  United  States. 

prescription.  Justinian  in  his  twenty-third  novel,  (cap.  1)  after 
alluding  to  the  evils  of  this  short  and  double  period,  enacts  that  in 
all  cases  a  delay  of  ten  days  should  be  given,  to  be  computed  from 
the  reading  of  the  sentence. 

Such  appears  to  have  been  the  law  of  Spain,  though  the  time 
was  subsequent^  restricted  to  five  days.  (Nov.  Recop.  lib.  11, 
tit.  20,  law  1.) 

By  the  practice  of  the  Ecclesiastical  and  Admiralty  Courts  in 
England,  appeals  from  a  definitive  sentence  may  be  either  "  apud* 
acta  "  at  the  time  of  the  sentence,  viva  voce,  in  presence  of  the 
Judge,  or  m  scriptU,  reduced  to  writing,  within  ten  (or  in  the  Ec- 
clesiastical Courts  fifteen)  days  before  a  notary.  In  appeals  from 
the  High  Court  of  Chancery  to  the  House  of  Lords,  the  first  step 
is  a  notice  of  appeal;  the  next,  a  petition  of  appeal,  which  is  pre- 
sented to  the  Lords,  and  on  which  a  summons  issues  to  the  respond- 
ent.    These  petitions  of  appeal  are  by  statute  limited  to  five  years. 

By  the  Acts  of  Congress,  appeals  are  made  subject  to  the  same 
rules,  regulations  and  restrictions  as  are  prescribed  by  law  in  cases 
of  writs  of  error.  These  rules  were  decided  by  the  Supreme  Court 
in  the  case  of  The  San  Pedro  (2  Wheat.  132)  to  be  those  con- 
tained in  the  twenty-second  and  twenty-third  sections  of  the  Act  of 
1789,  and  they  relate  to  the  time  within  which  a  writ  of  error  may 
be  brought — when  it  shall  operate  as  a  supersedeas — the  cita- 
tion to  the  adverse  party — the  security,  &c. 

All  these  regulations  are,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Supreme  Court, 
appUcable  to  appeals  under  the  Act  of  1803,  and  are  to  be  sub- 
stantially observed.  In  analogy,  then,  to  the  practice  in  writs  of 
error,  a  copy  of  the  appeal  is  served  upon  the  adverse  party  by 
lodging  it  in  the  Clerk's  office,  and  a  citation  is  served  upon  him  as 
required  by  the  twenty-second  and  twenty-third  sections  of  the  Act 
of  1789.  The  Supreme  Court  have  recognized,  however,  the 
practice  of  taking  an  appeal  in  open  Court,  or  entering  it  during 
the  session  of  the  Court  at  which  the  decree  appealed  from  is  pro- 
nounced. In  such  case  the  personal  citation  is  held  not  to  be 
indispensable.  (Ritei/  v.  Lamar,  2  Cranch,  344.)  And  perhaps 
the  service  of  the  notice  of  appeal  would  be  held  to  be  unnecessary 
for  the  same  reason. 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  245* 


Noe  V.  United  States. 


It  thus  appears  that  although  origmally  appeals  may  have  been 
taken  in  open  Court,  yet  by  the  practice  of  all  Courts  proceed- 
ing according  to  the  forms  of  civil  law,  the  appeal  may  be  taken  out 
of  Court  in  different  modes  prescribed  by  law  or  by  the  rules  of 
Court.  That  the  time  within  which  they  are  to  be  taken  is  in  like 
manner  expressly  hmited,  but  it  in-  no  case  refers  to  the  terms  of 
the  Court  pronouncing  the  decree — the  distinction  between  term 
time  and  vacation  being,  so  far  as  I  am  informed,  wholly  unknown 
to  the  civil  law.  Although  the  mode  of  appealing  "  in  scriptis,''^ 
or  before  a  notary,  is  not  admissible  in  our  practice,  yet  another 
mode  of  effecting  the  same  object  by  a  proceeding  out  of  Court  is 
authorized  by  statute  ;  and  we  have  seen  that  in  the  Ecclesiastical 
and  Admiralty  Courts  of  England  that  manner  of  taking  appeals  is 
still  allowed.  There  would  seem,  therefore,  no  ground  for  the  idea 
that  an  appeal  means,  ex  vi  termini^  a  proceeding  in  open  Court  to 
be  taken  of  necessity  during  the  term  at  which  the  decree  is  pro- 
nounced. Two  decisions  of  Judge  Story  have  been  cited  by  the 
counsel  for  the  claimants  in  support  of  this  position :  Norton  v. 
Rich^  (3  Mason,  442)  and  The  Steamboat  New  England^  (3  Sum. 
495).  It  appears  to  me  that  those  cases  corroborate  the  views 
above  expressed. 

The  Judiciary  Act  of  1789  directed  that  appeals  from  the 
District  Court  should  be  taken  to  the  "  next  Circuit  Court."  It 
provided  no  mode  of  taking  the  appeals.  The  case  was  therefore 
supposed  by  Judge  Story  to  be  untouched  by  statute.  Whether 
the  provisions  of  the  Act  of  1803  do  not  apply  to  appeals  from  the 
District  to  the  Circuit  Court  as  well  as  to  those  from  the  latter  to 
the  Supreme  Court,  may  admit  of  doubt.  The  provisions  of  the 
Act  of  1803  do  not  seem  to  have  been  brought  to  the  notice  of 
Judge  Story.  But  assuming  that  the  law  makes  no  provision 
whatever  on  the  subject,  except  to  allow  the  naked  right  of  appeal 
to  the  next  Circuit  Court,  the  case  presented  to  Judge  Story  does 
not  materially  differ  from  that  submitted  to  this  Court.  If,  there- 
fore, the  word  appeal  necessarily  imparted  a  proceeding  sedente 
curia  and  viva  voce,  he  would  have  determined  that  no  appeal  could 
be  taken  in  any  other  manner.  But  such  is  not  his  decision.  On 
the  contrary,  he  states  that  the  District  Courts  may  require  the 


I 


246  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

, —^ _ — 

Noe  V.  United  States. 

appeals  to  be  taken  either  sedente  curia  and  before  an  adjournment 
sine  die,  or  afterwards,  within  a  fixed  time,  in  the  Clerk's  ojffice. 
As  in  the  Massachusetts  district  no  rules  as  to  appeals  had  been 
established,  but  the  uniform  course  from  the  earliest  period  had 
been  to  take  appeals  in  open  Court  before  the  adjournment,  this 
practice  was  considered  equivalent  to  a  rule,  and  obligatory  upon 
all  parties. 

The  case  of  The  Steamboat  New  England^  so  far  as  it  relates 
to  the  point  under  discussion,  affirms  the  decision  oi  Norton  v. 
Rich,  and  avowedly  proceeds  on  its  authority. 

It  is.  evident  that  in  these  cases  appeals  were  required  to  be 
taken  sedente  curia  and  before  adjournment,  solely  because  the 
rules  of  Court,  or  a  long  continued  and  uniform  practice  equivalent 
to  a  rule,  had  so  provided ;  and  not  because  the  right  of  appeal 
conferred  by  statute  imported  such  a  proceeding  and  none  other. 
Had  such  been  Judge  Story'^  coustruction  of  the  term,  he  would 
not  have  admitted  the  power  of  the  Court  to  enlarge  or  abridge 
the  right. 

The  one  hundred  and  fifty-second  rule  of  the  District  Court  for 
the  Southern  District  of  New  York,  affirms  the  same  principle. 
That  rule  provides  that  appeals  may  be  entered  within  ten  days 
from  the  time  of  rendering  the  decree.  "  A  brief  notice  in  writing, 
to  the  Clerk  and  opposite  proctor,  that  the  party  appeals  in  the 
cause,  shall  be  a  sufficient  entry  of  the  appeal,  without  any  petition 
to  the  Court  for  leave  to  enter  the  same."  Under  this  rule,  ap- 
peals are  entered  in  the  Clerk's  office  within  the  time  limited,  but 
wholly  without  regard  to  the  adjournment  of  the  Court ;  and  the 
practice  of  taking  an  appeal  in  open  Court  at  any  time  before  its 
adjournment  has  fallen  into  disuse,  if,  indeed,  it  be  any  longer  ad- 
missible. 

I  think  it  clear  that  the  term  "  appeal,"  according  to  the  practice 
of  all  the  Courts  proceeding  according  to  the  forms  of  the  civil  law, 
has  no  such  meaning  as  that  attributed  to  it  in  the  argument.  But 
even  if  this  were  doubtful,  the  question  would  still  arise,  whether 
Congress  intended  to  use  it  in  the  Act  of  1851  in  any  sueh 
limited  and  doubtful  sense.  Had  the  intention  of  Congress  been 
to  prescribe  a  period  shorter  than  that  allowed  by  the  general  laws 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  247 

Noc  V.  United  States. 

regulating  appeals,  some  limitation  would  probably  have  been  fixed 
as  in  the  Acts  of  1824  and  1828,  by  the  first  of  which  twelve 
months  and  by  the  second  four  months  were  allowed. 

They  would  hardly  have  left  the  limitation  to  be  inferred  from 
the  use  of  the  word  "  appeal "  iu  a  sense  different  from  that  in 
which  it  is  elsewhere  used  in  legislation,  and  when  the  period  thus 
allowed  would  vary  from  six  months  to  a  few  moments,  depending 
upon  whether  the  decree  was  rendered  at  the  beginning  or  the  end 
of  the  term.  It  seems  far  more  probable  that  Congress  used  the 
term  as  it  is  known  in  the  Acts  of  Congress,  and  as  importing  a 
proceeding  to  be  taken  within  five  years  from  the  date  of  the  de- 
cree. Such  a  limitation  would  no  doubt  be  applied  should  the  case 
arise,  and  very  possibly  the  Court,  in  the  absence  of  express  regu- 
lations on  the  subject,  would  be  authorized  to  fix  by  its  rules  a 
reasonable  period  within  which  the  appeal  is  to  be  taken,  as  has 
been  done  by  the  District  Courts  sitting  in  Admiralty  in  cases  of 
appeal  to  the  Circuit  Court,  which  are  in  like  manner  unprovided 
for  by  statute.  No  such  rules  have,  however,  been  established  by 
this  Court,  the  practice  having  been  to  grant  the  appeal  whenever 
moved  for. 

The  objection  we  have  considered  has  only  recently  been  raised, 
and  if  suffered  to  prevail  would  operate  as  a  surprise  upon  the 
United  States,  as  well  as  upon  claimants  who,  in  ignorance  of  any 
such  implied  limitation  on  the  right  of  appeal,  have  omitted  to  move 
for  it  before  the  expiration  of  the  term  at  which  the  decree  was 
rendered. 

For  the  reasons  above  stated,  we  think  the  objection  cannot  be 
sustained. 

It  may  be  observed  in  conclusion,  that  the  question  presented  is 
in  its  own  nature  more  fit  for  the  consideration  of  the  superior 
tribunal  to  which  an  appeal  is  sought,  than  for  that  of  the  inferior 
Court  from  which  an  appeal  is  taken.  A  preliminary  motion  to 
dismiss  the  appeal  as  irregularly  taken  may  be  made  before  the 
Supreme  Court,  and  the  question  finally  determined ;  whereas,  a 
refusal  by  this  Court  to  allow  the  appeal  would  involve  the  delay  of 
a  mandamus  to  this  Court,  until  the  return  of  which  the  decision  of 
the  point  would  necessarily  be  deferred. 


248  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COUET, 

Heirs  of  Armijo  v.  United  States. 

HEIRS  OF  JOSE  F.  ARMIJO,  claiming  the  Rancho  Las 
ToLBNAS,  Appellants,  vs,  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

This  claim  is  entitled  to  confirmation  under  the  rulings  of  the  Supreme  Court  in 
Fremont's  case. 

Claim  for  three  leagues  of  land  in  Solano  county,  rejected  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimants. 

Jeremiah  Clarke,  for  Appellants. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  documentary  evidence  produced  from  the  archives  shows 
that  in  November,  1837,  Jos^  F.  Armijo  petitioned  for  the  land 
claimed  in  this  case,  and  obtained  from  M.  G.  Yallejo,  Director  of 
Colonization  and  Mihtary  Commandant  of  the  district,  permission  to 
occupy  it.  On  the  twenty-eighth  of  February,  1840,  he  presented 
his  petition  to  the  Governor,  reciting  the  previous  proceedings  and 
soliciting  a  final  grant.  This  petition  -was  referred  to  the  Prefect 
of  the  district,  and  a  favorable  inforine  returned.  On  the  third  of 
March,  1840,  a  grant  in  the  usual  form  was  issued  by  Governor 
Alvarado.  The  original  grant  dehvered  to  the  party  is  produced 
by  him  and  its  genuineness  proved.  The  authenticity  of  the  papers 
produced  from  the  archives  is  not  disputed,  nor  is  the  bona  fides  of 
the  grant  questioned. 

It  also  appears  that  from  a  period  shortly  subsequent  to  the 
grant,  the  grantee  took  possession  of  his  land,  built  a  house  upon 
and  stocked  it  v/ith  cattle.  From  that  time  to  the  present  the 
rancho  has  been  in  possession  of  Armijo  and  his  heirs. 

Some  doubt  is  raised  as  to  whether  the  house  built  by  Armijo  was 
within  the  boundaries  of  the  land  granted  to  him,  or  within  those  of 
the  adjoining  rancho  of  Gen.  Vallejo.  It  is  evident,  however,  that 
Armijo  occupied  the  land,  claiming  it  to  be  his  under  his  grant ;  that 
he  continued  to  assert  his  title  from  the  date  of  his  grant  until  his 
death,  and  that  his  representatives  were  found  by  the  United  States, 
at  the  conquest,  living  on  the  land  and  claiming  to  own  it.  It  is 
clear,  therefore,  that  Armijo  never  abandoned  his  rights,  and  the 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  249 

Palmer  ct  al.  v.  United  States. 

case  has  no  analogy  to  that  indicated  by  the  Supreme  Court  as 
amounting  to  an  equitable  forfeiture  of  the  rights  acquired  by  the 
grant,  viz :  an  abandonment  of  the  grant  during  the  existence  of 
the  former  Government,  and  an  attempt  to  resume  it  from  its  en- 
hanced value. 

The  land  is  described  in  the  grant  as  known  by  the  name  of 
"  Tolenas,"  and  bounded  by  the  Arroyo  of  Suisun,  the  Estero  of 
Julpinas,  the  Arroyo  of  Ololatos,  and  the  Sierra. 

The  fourth  condition  describes  it  as  of  three  leagues  in  extent,  as 
shown  by  the  map  in  the  expediente.  The  surplus  is  reserved  in 
the  usual  form. 

The  exterior  boundaries  are  shown  to  embrace  a  tract  considera- 
bly larger  than  the  quantity  mentioned  in  the  conditioj:i.  Any  ob- 
jection to  the  grant  on  this  account  is  disposed  of  by  the  Supreme 
Court  in  the  case  of  Fremont. 

The  claimants  are  therefore  entitled  to  a  decree  of  confirmation 
to  three  leagues  of  land,  to  be  located  within  the  exterior  limits 
mentioned  in  the  grant,  and  in  the  form  and  divisions  prescribed  by 
law  for  surveys  of  lands  in  California,  and  in  one  entire  tract. 


JOSEPH  C.  PALMER  et  al,  CLAmma  the  Rancho  Punta 
DE  LoBOS,  Appellants,  vs,  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

The  power  of  the  Mexican  Government  to  grant  lands  in  California  was  unim- 
paired by. the  declaration  of  Congress  that  war  existed,  and  the  prosecution 
of  that  war  by  the  Executive,  and  did  not  cease  until  the  actual  conquest  of 
the  country. 

The  declaration  in  the  projet  of  the  treaty  between  the  United  States  and  Mexico 
that  no  grants  of  land  had  been  made  by  the  latter  subsequent  to  May  13th, 
1846,  which  declaration  was  stricken  out  by  the  Senate,  cannot  bar  the  rights 
of  persons  claiming  lands  under  grants  made  since  that  day,  and  before  actual 
conquest ;  those  rights  being  held  sacred  by  the  laws  and  usages  of  civilized 
nations,  and  not  affected  by  treaty  stipulations. 

The  date  of  the  actual  conquest  of  California  not  necessary  to  be  judicially  ascer- 
tained, so  far  as  the  decision  of  this  case  is  involved. 

The  claim  must  be  rejected,  on  the  ground  that  the  bonajides  of  the  grant  have  not 
been  sufficiently  established  by  the  evidence. 


250  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

Claim  for  two  leagues  of  land  in  Sari  Francisco  county,  rejected 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  claimants. 

E.  L.  GooLD,  for  Appellants. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  and  Edmund  Ran- 
dolph, for  Appellees. 

Before  proceeding  to  an  examination  of  the  merits  of  this  case,  a 
general  objection  to  the  validity  of  the  grant  must  be  considered. 
The  grant  purports  to  have  been  executed  on  the  twenty-fifth  of 
June,  1846,  subsequently  to  the  declaration  of  war  between  the 
United  States  and  Mexico. 

It  is  contended,  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  that  on  general 
principles  of  public  law,  grants  made  flagrante  hello,  when  conquest 
has  been  set  on  foot,  and  actual  occupation  is  imminent  and  in- 
evitable, have  no  vahdity  against  the  subsequent  conqueror.  The 
question  has  not  heretofore  been  presented  to  this  Court.  It  has 
been  discussed  with  much  ingenuity  and  abihty. 

It  is  urged  that  in  the  conduct  of  war  and  the  determination  of 
its  objects,  the  political  department  is  supreme  ;  and  that  the  ju- 
diciary are  bound  by  the  view  taken  of  the  war  by  the  political 
branch  of  the  Government ;  that  although  Congress  has  alone  power 
to  declare  war,  to  the  Executive  is  given  the  right  of  shaping  it  to 
its  ends  or  of  declaring  its  objects. 

To  ascertain  its  objects  resort  must,  therefore,  be  had  to  Ex- 
ecutive acts,  and  as  the  Executive  acts  in  this  case  unequivocally 
indicate  that  a  principal  object  of  the  war  was  to  acquire  Cahfornia, 
that  acquisition  was  thus  brought  within  the  scope  of  the  war,  and 
must  be  so  regarded  by  the  Courts. 

To  this  point  the  case  of  Har court  v.  G-ailyard^  12  Wheat.,  is 
cited.  Such  being  the  object  or  scope  of  the  war,  it  is  urged  that 
the  intended  conquest  of  California  embraced  not  only  the  estab- 
lishment of  sovereign  rights  in  the  territory,  but  also  the  acquisition 
of  the  public  property  within  it. 

That  the  proprietary  rights  to  be  acquired  by  the  conquest  are 
as  essential,  though  not  as  important  a  part  of  the  fruits  of  con- 
quest, as  the  political  rights,  the  commercial  and  other  advantages 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  251 

Palmer  ct  al.  v.  United  States. 

proposed  to  be  obtained,  and  that  no  part  of  these  objects  of  the 
conquest  is  to  be  ignored. 

The  conquest  of  CaHfornia,  including  the  acquisition  of  the  public 
domain,  having  been  thus  shown  to  have  been  the  object,  or  brought 
within  the  scope  of  the  war,  it  was  urged  that  any  grants  of  public 
land  made  after  the  conquest  was  projected,  and  when  it  was  about 
to  be  eifected,  though  before  it  actually  occurred,  must  be  deemed 
to  be  in  fraud  of  the  rights  of  the  incoming  conqueror,  and  invalid 
as  against  him. 

The  foregoing  statement  is  believed  to  present  the  outline  of  the 
argument  submitted  on  the  part  of  the  United  States.  Both  the 
premises  and  the  conclusion  must  be  examined. 

If  the  conquest  of  California  was  the  object  of  the  war,  it  must 
be  so  considered,  because  that  object  was  avowed  by  competent 
authority  when  war  was  declared,  or  because  it  Avas  made  the  object 
of  the  war  after  its  commencement  by  the  political  branch  of  the 
Government. 

It  may  be  admitted  that  this  Government  had  long  regarded 
California,  or  the  Bay  of  San  Francisco,  as  an  important  and  de- 
sirable acquisition.  The  instructions  of  the  President  to  Mr. 
Slidell  indicate  the  wish  of  the  Executive  to  obtain  it  by  purchase 
and  cession,  as  Louisiana  and  Florida  had  been  acquired. 

It  by  no  means  follows  that  the  intention  to  obtain  it  by  force  of 
arms  or  conquest  can  be  attributed  to  Congress,  still  less  that  such 
was  its  object  or  motive  in  declaring  w^ar. 

The  law  by  which  war  was  declared  recognizes  it  as  previously 
existing  by  the  act  of  Mexico,  and  it  is  known  that  hostilities  arose 
from  the  invasion  by  Mexico  of  a.  territory  claimed  by  the  United 
States  to  be  within  their  limits.  Such  was  not,  therefore,  the 
object  for  w^hich  war  w^as  declared,  or  its  existence  recognized,  nor 
could  it  constitutionally  have  been. 

It  is  observed  by  Chief  Justice  Taney,  in  Fleming-  v.  Page,  9 
How.  614 :  "  The  genius  and  character  of  our  institutions  are 
peaceful,  and  the  power  to  declare  w^ar  was  not  conferred  upon 
Congress  for  the  purpose  of  aggression  or  aggrandizement,  but  to 
enable  the  General  Government  to  vindicate  by  arms,  if  it  should 
become  necessary,  its  own  rights  and  the  rights  of  its  citizens.  A 
17 


252  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

war,  therefore,  declared  by  Congress  can  never  be  presumed  to  be 
waged  for  the  purpose  of  conquest  or  the  acquisition  of  territory." 

As  a  limitation  upon  the  power  of  Congress  this  distinction  may 
practically  be  unimportant.  As  every  war  in  which  the  country 
may  be  engaged  must  be  regarded  by  all  branches  of  the  Govern- 
ment, and  even  by  neutrals,  as  a  just  war ;  and  as  nations  can 
readily  cloak  a  spirit  of  rapacity  and  aggression  under  professions 
of  justice  and  moderation,  it  is  at  all  times  easy,  should  our  country 
be  animated  by  such  a  spirit,  to  declare  an  aggressive  war  to  be 
undertaken  in  self-defense,  and  an  intended  conquest  to  be  desired 
only  as  a  compensation  for  past  or  security  against  future  injuries. 
But  the  distinction  is  important  when  a  Court  is  asked  to  pre- 
sume that  conquest  was  the  object  of  the  war. 

Under  our  Government,  at  least,  such  a  presumption  cannot  be 
indulged. 

The  conquest  of  California  being  thus  shown  not  to  have  been 
the  object  for  which  war  was  declared,  we  may  next  inquire  whether 
by  the  acts  of  the  Executive  under  its  power  to  conduct  the  war,  it 
became  such,  or  was  brought  within  its  scope,  in  the  sense  in  which 
the  phrase  was  used  at  the  bar  ? 

In  his  annual  message  to  Congress  in  December,  1846,  the 
President  distinctly  states  that  the  war  originated  in  the  attempt  of 
Mexico  to  reconquer  Texas  to  the  Sabine.  After  adverting  to  the 
considerations  which  had  induced  the  Executive  to  interpose  no  olv 
stacles  to  the  return  of  Santa  Anna,  the  latter  being  more  favorably 
disposed  to  peace  than  Paredes,  who  was  then  at  the  head  of  aifairs, 
the  President  observed :  "  The  war  has  not  been  waged  with  a 
view  to  conquest,  but  having  been  commenced  by  Mexico,  it  has 
been  carried  into  the  enemy's  country,  and  will  be  vigorously  pros- 
ecuted there  with  a  view  to  obtain  an  honorable  peace,  and  thereby 
secure  ample  indemnity  for  the  expenses  of  the  war,  as  well  as  our 
much  injured  citizens,  who  have  large  pecuniary  demands  against 
Mexico." 

Similar  declarations  are  frequently  and  emphatically  reiterated 
by  the  President  in  various  communications  to  Congress,  and  in  the 
correspondence  between  the  American  Commissioner  and  the  Mex- 
ican authorities. 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  253 

Palmer  ct  al.  v.  United  States. 

The  object  of  the  war,  therefore,  as  indicated  by  Executive  acts 
and  declarations,  was  not  conquest,  or  if  conquest,  it  was  that  of  a 
safe  and  honorable  peace. 

It  is  true  that  after  the  military  occupation  of  California,  and 
after  our  arms  had  been  everywhere  successful,  and  perhaps  at  the 
commencement  of  hostilities,  the  Executive  and  the  nation  may 
have  confidently  anticipated  that  by  the  treaty  of  peace  we  would 
acquire  California.  As  Mexico  was  known  to  be  impoverished  and 
distracted  by  dissensions,  it  was  obvious  that  the  only  indemnity 
she  could  afford  us  for  the  expenses  of  the  war  was  the  cession  of  a 
portion  of  her  territory. 

The  instructions  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  Mr.  Trist  show  that 
the  extension  of  the  boundaries  of  the  United  States  over  New 
Mexico  and  Upper  California,  for  a  sum  not  exceeding  120,000,000, 
was  a  condition  sine  qua  non  of  any  treaty. 

The  extraordinary  successes  of  our  arms,  the  fact  that  we  already 
held  possession  of  a  great  part  of  the  territory  of  the  enemy  and 
virtually  of  his  Capital,  our  great  expenditures  of  blood  and  treas- 
ure, entitled  us  to  retain  a  portion  at  least  of  our  conquest,  as  the 
only  indemnity  we  could  obtain.  But  we  were  willing  to  restore  a 
considerable  part  of  our  acquisitions,  and  to  pay  for  that  retained  by 
us  a  large  amount  of  money. 

But  such  views  and  intentions  on  the  part  of  the  Executive  as  to 
the  condition  on  which  the  war  should  cease,  are  very  different 
from  waging  it  with  a  view  to  conquest.  The  war  then  cannot,  in 
any  just  sense,  be  deemed  to  have  been  declared  by  Congress,  or 
conducted  by  the  Executive,  with  a  view  to  conquest. 

The  power  of  the  President  in  the  conduct  of  the  war  wasttiat  of 
Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Army  and  Navy.  He  had  authority  to 
direct  and  control  mihtary  operations.  As  part  of  the  treaty-making 
power,  he  could  determine  where  and  on  what  conditions  a  treaty 
of  peace  should  be  made.  But  he  had  no  power  to  impress  upon 
the  war  a  purpose  different  from  that  with  which  it  was  commenced, 
and  which,  as  Chief  Justice  Taney  declares,  Congress  could  not 
constitutionally  entertain.  "  The  law  declaring  war,"  observes  the 
same  great  authority  in  the  case  above  cited,  "  does  not  imply  an 
authority  to  the  President  to  enlarge  the  limits  of  the  United  States 


254  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

by  subjugating  the  enemy's  country.  The  United  States,  it  is  true, 
may  extend  its  boundaries  by  treaty  or  conquest,  and  may  de- 
mand the  cession  of  territory  as  the  condition  of  peace,  to  indemnify 
its  citizens  for  the  injuries  they  have  suffered,  or  to  reimburse  the 
Government  for  the  expenses  of  the  war.  But  this  can  be  done 
only  by  the  treaty-making  power,  or  the  legislative  authority,  and 
is  not  a  part  of  the  authority  conferred  upon  the  President  by  the 
declaration  of  war.  His  duty  and  his  power  are  purely  military. 
As  Commander-in-Chief  he  is  authorized  to  direct  the  military  and 
naval  forces  placed  by  law  at  his  command,  and  to  employ  them  in 
the  manner  he  may  deem  most  effectual  to  harrass  and  conquer 
and  subdue  the  enemy.  He  may  invade  the  hostile  country  and 
subject  it  to  the  sovereignty  and  authority  of  the  United  States. 
But  his  conquests  do  not  enlarge  the  boundaries  of  the  United 
States,  nor  extend  the  operations  of  our  institutions  and  laws  beyond 
the  limits  before  assigned  them  by  the  legislative  power." 

It  is  true  that  in  the  case  in  which  these  observations  are  made, 
the  point  to  be  determined  was  whether  enemies'  territory,  which 
in  the  course  of  hostilities  had  come  into  our  military  possession, 
became  a  part  of  the  United  States  and  subject  to  our  general 
laws.  But  they  are  important  to  this  case  as  defining  the  power  of 
the  President  in  war  to  be  merely  that  of  the  military  Commander- 
in-Chief  ;  that  territory  can  be  acquired  only  by  the  treaty-making 
and  legislative  authority,  and  conssequently,  the  fact  that  hos- 
tilities are  by  the  military  power  directed  against  a  particular  por- 
tion of  the  enemy's  territory,  cannot  be  said  to  make  the  acquisi- 
tion of  that  territory  the  object  of  the  war. 

It  is  therefore  apparent  that  the  war  with  Mexico  cannot  be  re- 
garded by  the  Judicial  Department  of  this  Government  as  com- 
menced or  conducted  with  the  object  of  effecting  the  conquest  of 
California. 

The  most  that  can  be  said  is,  that  its  military  occupation  was 
effected  as  a  means  of  crippling  and  subduing  the  enemy,  and  with 
the  expectation  on  the  part  of  the  Executive  that  we  would  retain 
and  finally  insist  upon  the  cession  of  the  territory  so  subjugated  by 
our  arms,  as  an  indemnity  for  our  injuries  and  expenses. 

The  nature  and  amount  of  indemnity  to  be  required,  the  extent 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  255 


Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 


of  territory  to  be  ceded,  depended  upon  the  will  of  the  Senate  and 
the  Executive  as  the  treaty-making  power  ;  and  until  that  will  was 
expressed  in  the  treaty,  the  intention  to  effect  the  permanent  ac- 
quisition of  all  California  cannot  be  attributed  to  the  political  power, 
any  more  than  a  similar  intention  with  regard  to  those  conquests 
which  at  the  close  of  the  war  were  restored. 

If,  then,  it  were  a  principle  of  public  law  that  all  alienations  of 
public  domain  by  a  sovereign  are  invalid  as  against  an  enemy  who 
has  commenced  or  is  prosecuting  a  war,  with  the  object  of  con- 
quering the  territory  within  which  the  property  is  situated,  or  who 
has  set  on  foot  expeditions  for  the  purpose  with  sufficient  power  to 
attain  the  end,  as  proved  by  the  event,  the  facts  of  this  case  would 
hardly  admit  of  its  application. 

But  assuming  the  facts  as  contended  for  by  the  United  States, 
we  proceed  to  inquire  whether  such  a  rule  of  law  exists.  The 
right  of  Mexico  to  dispose  of  her  public  domain  in  California  before 
the  war  is  admitted.  It  is  not  denied  that  that  right  ceased  as 
against  the  United  States  when  the  latter  effected  the  conquest  of 
the  country  and  subverted  the  Mexican  authority. 

If  it  ceased  before  the  actual  conquest  and  displacement  of  the 
Mexican  authority,  it  must  be  because  the  determination  of  the 
United  States  to  effect  the  conquest,  and  the  making  preparation 
to  carry  out  its  determination,  gave  to  the  latter  some  inchoate  or 
inceptive  right  to  the  territory  subsequently  conquered,  and  the 
title  consummated  by  the  conqnest  relates  back  by  a  kind  of  fiction 
to  the  date  of  its  inception. 

We  have  been  unable  to  discover  any  trace  or  intimation  of  such 
a  doctrine  in  any  writer  on  the  laws  of  war. 

The  rights  derived  from  conquest  are  derived  from  force  alone. 
They  are  recognized  because  there  is  no  one  to  dispute  them  ;  not 
because  they  are,  in  a  moral  sense,  right  and  just.  The  conquest 
of  an  enemy's  country,  admitted  to  be  his,  is  not,  therefore,  the  as- 
sertion of  an  antecedent  right. 

It  is  the  assertion  of  the  will  and  the  power  to  wrest  it  from  him. 

Even  where  a  conquest  is  effected  to  obtain  an  indemnity  justly 
due,  it  is  not  the  assertion  of  any  antecedent  right  to  the  particular 


256  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

territory  conquered,  but  only  of  the  general  right  to  a  compensation 
for  injury. 

The  right  of  the  conqueror  is  therefore  derived  from  the  con- 
quest alone.  It  originates  in  the  conquest,  not  in  the  intention  to 
conquer,  though  coupled  with  the  ability  to  effect  his  purpose,  nor 
even  in  the  right  to  conquer  as  a  means  of  obtaining  satisfaction  for 
injury. 

It  is  the  fact  of  conquest,  not  the  intention  or  the  power  to  con- 
quer, which  clothes  him  with  the  rights  of  a  conqueror. 

The  rights  acquired  by  the  conquest  are  temporary  and  pre- 
carious until  the  jus  post  Umiidi  is  extinguished  ;  and  if  a  reconquest 
is  eifected,  the  rights  of  the  sovereign  who  has  temporarily  been 
displaced  revive,  and  are  deemed  to  have  been  uninterrupted. 

The  term  title  by  conquest  expresses,  therefore,  a  fact  and  not  a 
right.  Until  the  fact  of  conquest  occurs,  the  conqueror  can  have 
no  rights.  To  affirm  that  a  title  acquired  by  conquest  relates  back 
to  a  period  anterior  to  the  conquest,  is  almost  a  contradiction  in 
terms. 

Until,  then,  the  conquest  is  effected,  the  rights  of  the  existing 
sovereign  remain  unimpau-ed.  He  can  therefore  dispose  of  the 
public  property  at  his  discretion  ;  nor  can  that  right  be  effected  by 
the  determination  of  an  enemy  to  conquer  the  territory,  and  by  his 
preparations  for  the  purpose,  though  the  event  may  demonstrate 
the  conquest  to  have  been  practicable. 

The  case  of  Harcoiirt  v.  Gaillard  has  been  cited  by  the  counsel 
of  the  United  States  in  support  of  the  doctrine  contended  for  by 
them. 

The  distinction  between  that  case  and  the  case  at  bar  is  obvious. 

In  Harcourt  v.  Gaillard  the  question  was  as  to  the  vahdity  of  a 
grant  by  a  British  Governor  of  land  within  a  territory  claimed  to 
belong  to  the  United  States.  As  our  Government  had  asserted 
and  maintained  by  arms  its  title  to  the  disputed  tract,  the  Judicial 
Department  were  not  at  liberty  to  declare  the  claim  to  be  wrongful, 
and  to  recognize  the  right  of  any  other  sovereign  over  the  territory 
in  question. 

The  title  of  the  United  States  was  in  no  sense  acquired  by  con- 
quest. Her  title  was  antecedent  to  the  war — it  was  merely  main- 
tained by  arms  and  recognized  by  the  treaty  of  peace. 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  257 

Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

The  question  presented  was,  in  the  language  of  the  Court,  "  one 
of  disputed  boundaries,  within  which  the  power  that  succeeds  in  war 
is  not  obhged  to  recognize  as  vaUd  any  acts  of  ownership  exercised 
bj  his  adversary." 

Had  the  claim  been  that  of  conquest  alone,  the  case  would  have 
presented,  say  the  Court,  more  difficulty.  "  That  ground  would 
admit  the  original  right  of  the  Governor  of  Florida  to  grant,  and  if 
so,  his  right  to  grant  might  have  continued  until  the  treaty  of  peace, 
and  the  grant  to  Harcourt  might  in  that  case  have  had  extended  to 
it  the  principles  of  public  law  v/hich  are  applicable  to  territories  ac- 
quired by  conquest,  whereas  the  right  set  up  by  South  Carolina 
and  Georgia  denies  all  power  in  the  grantor  over  the  soil." 

The  distinction  is  made  still  more  apparent  in  a  subsequent  part 
of  the  opinion  of  the  Court :  "  War  is  a  suit  prosecuted  by  the 
sword ;  and  where  the  question  to  be  decided  is  one  of  original 
claim  to  territory/,  grants  of  soil,  made  flagrante  hello  by  the  party 
that  fails,  can  only  derive  validity  from  treaty  stipulations.  It  is 
not  necessary  here  to  consider  the  rights  of  the  conqueror  in  case  of 
actual  conquest^     (p.  528.) 

The  latter  is  precisely  the  question  to  be  considered  in  the  case 
at  bar. 

The  argument  of  the  counsel  for  the  United  States  can,  there- 
fore, derive  no  support  from  the  case  referred  to. 

It  is  proper,  however,  to  observe  that  the  case  of  Harcourt  v. 
Gaillai'd  was  not  cited  by  counsel  as  directly  in  point.  It  was 
thought  to  establish  that  all  grants  of  territory  brought  within  the 
scope  of  the  war  are  invalid  ;  that  the  case  of  disputed  boundaries 
presents  but  an  illustration  of  the  general  principle,  while  the  case 
at  the  bar  furnishes  another. 

It  has  seemed  to  me,  however,  that  the  principle  of  that  decision 
relates  exclusively  to  the  case  of  disputed  boundaries,  and  that  the 
distinction  is  clearly  drawn  between  that  case  and  one  like  the 
present ;  that  between  them  the  obvious  difference  exists  that  the 
former  is  a  case  of  "  original  claim  to  territory,"  while  the  other  is 
one  of  "  actual  conquest." 

It  is  said  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  that  if  a  belligerent 
can,  after  a  declaration  of  war,  grant  any  portion  of  his  property, 


258  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

he  can  grant  the  whole,  and  thus  might,  by  granting  himself  away, 
escape  responsibihty.  The  case  supposed  is  an  extreme  one.  It 
can  rarely  occur  that  a  nation  will  seek  safety  by  self-destruction. 

But  in  such  case  the  adversary  might  refuse  to  recognize  such  a 
voluntary  suicide  as  affecting  his  rights.  For  the  purpose  of  ob- 
taining satisfaction  he  might  justly  treat  the  nationality  sought  to 
be  extinguished  as  still  existing.  But  at  all  events,  his  rights  could 
be  enforced  against  the  successor  or  grantee  of  the  extinguished 
sovereignty. 

The  question  would  then  be  purely  political ;  for  the  new  sov- 
ereign, whether  to  carry  on  the  war  or  accede  to  the  demands 
of  the  enemy  of  his  grantor;  and  for  the  latter,  whether  to  prosecute 
the  war  against  the  new  sovereign.  Little  aid,  however,  can  be 
derived  from  the  consideration  of  such  extreme  and  improbable  cases. 

It  is  further  urged  that  the  doctrine  contended  for  on  behalf  of 
the  United  States  is  in  the  prize  law. 

It  may  perhaps  be  admitted  that  a  theory  of  maritime  prize 
formerly  obtained,  which  assumed  that  a  belligerent  has  a  vested 
right  by  the  declaration  of  war  in  all  sea-borne  private  property  of 
the  other  belligerent ;  that  no  such  property  can  be  the  subject  of 
lawful  sale  ;  that  all  contracts  of  sale  touching  belligerent  property 
of  any  sort,  though  valid  on  land,  are  invalidated  by  the  mere  fact 
of  such  property  being  embarked  on  the  ocean,  and  that  if  trans- 
ferred to  a  neutral  after  the  declaration  of  war,  it  is  a  lawful  prize 
to  the  other  belligerent. 

Such  is  not  now  the  received  law  of  nations.  It  is  now  admitted 
that  the  bona  fide  sale  of  the  ships  of  belligerents  to  neutrals  in 
time  of  war  is  lawful  and  valid  unless  made  in  transitu. 

In  the  Johanna  Emiha,  29th  Eng.,  L.  and  Eq.  R.  562,  Dr. 
Leishington  says :  "  It  is  not  denied  that  it  is  competent  for 
neutrals  to  purchase  the  property  of  enemies  in  another  country, 
whether  consisting  of  ships  or  anything  else.  They  have  a  perfect 
right  to  do  so,  and  no  belligerent  right  can  override  it.^'' 

Such  is  the  doctrine  maintained  by  our  Government.  See 
opinion  of  Attorney  General  Cushing,  October  8th,  1855. 

If  a  sale  to  a  neutral  of  a  ship  in  transitu  is  held  invaUd  as 
against  a  belligerent,  it  is  not  by  reason  of  any  inchoate  right  or 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  259 

Palmer  ct  al.  v.  United  States. 

lien  acquired  by  the  latter  by  the  mere  declaration  of  war,  or  be- 
cause the  right  of  the  enemy  to  dispose  of  his  property  is  invalidated 
by  the  declaration  of  war,  but  because  a  sale  of  a  ship  in  transitu 
is  taken  as  proof  of  collusion  and  fraud,  and  as  showing  that  no  ab- 
solute transfer  has  in  fact  been  made.  The  soundness  of  even  this 
rule  is  doubted  by  the  Attorney  General  in  the  opinion  referred  to. 

A  sale  of  a  ship  not  in  transitu.^  by  a  belligerent  to  a  neutral,  is 
valid  as  against  a  subsequent  captor,  no  matter  how  imminent  the 
danger  of  capture  Avould  have  been  had  she  remained  enemy's 
property,  and  no  matter  what  may  be  the  number  of  hostile  fleets 
fitted  out  to  cruise  against  her  and  similar  property  of  the  bellig- 
erent. 

It  appears,  then,  that  the  law  of  nations  with  regard  to  prize  of 
war  does  not  recognize  the  principle  contended  for. 

It  is  urged,  however,  that  this  principle  lies  at  the  foundation  of 
the  doctrine  oi post  liminii. 

It  is  argued  that  a  state  of  war  implies  the  reciprocal  denial  by 
each  belligerent  of  all  rights  of  the  other.  That  each  relies  upon 
force  alone — force  to  retain  or  force  to  take. 

They  are  thus  in  ceqiiali  jure. 

The  principle,  therefore,  by  which,  on  a  reconquest,  the  original 
title  revives,  and  is  deemed  to  have  been  uninterrupted,  is  founded 
on  the  presumption  that  the  displaced  sovereign  intended  a  recon- 
quest when  he  was  displaced,  and  his  title  on  a  reconquest  relates 
back  to  the  time  when  he  is  presumed  to  have  formed  such  inten- 
tion. If,  then,  (it  is  argued)  the  title  by  reconquest  relates  back 
to  the  time  of  the  formation  of  the  intention  to  reconquer,  the  title 
by  conquest  must  relate  back  to  a  similar  period — for  a  state  of  war 
implies  the  negation  of  all  antecedent  right  on  either  side.  The 
only  difference  between  the  cases  being,  that  in  the  case  of  a  recon- 
quest, the  intention  to  reconquer  is  presumed  until  the  jus  post  lim- 
inii is  extinguished ;  while  in  the  case  of  conquest,  that  intention 
must  be  shown  by  the  political  acts  and  declarations  of  the  con- 
queror. 

The  argument  is  ingenious,  but  the  premises  are,  I  think,  erro- 
neous. 

It  is  assumed  that  a  new  title  is  acquired  by  a  sovereign  who 
recovers  territories  from  which  he  has  temporarily  been  driven. 


260  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

On  the  contrary,  he  holds  it  by  his  original  title,  which  could 
only  have  been  displaced  by  a  permanent  conquest.  But  the  fact 
that  he  recovers  the  territory  proves  that  what  seemed  a  conquest 
was  but  a  temporary  dispossession.  The  invader,  therefore,  ac- 
quired no  rights,  nor  did  the  original  sovereign  lose  any.  He  con- 
tinues to  rule,  not  by  a  newly  acquired  title  which  relates  back  to 
any  former  period,  but  by  his  ancient  title,  which,  in  contemplation 
of  law,  has  never  been  divested. 

l^OY  is  it  true  that  war  is  the  reciprocal  denial  of  all  rights  by 
the  belligerents,  with  respect  to  the  territories  of  either. 

A  conqueror  does  not  deny  that  the  territory  seized  was  at  the 
time  of  the  conquest  the  territory  of  his  enemy,  any  more  than  the 
attaching  creditor  denies  the  property  attached  to  be  that  of  his 
debtor. 

On  the  contrary,  he  asserts  it  to  be  his.  He  seizes  it  as  the 
property  of  his  enemy,  and  because  it  is  his.  He  asserts  no  ante- 
cedent title  in  himself.  He  declares,  not  that  the  territory  was  his, 
but  that  he  will  make  it  his  by  conquest. 

The  title  or  right  acquired  by  a  conquest  is  not  the  same  as  that 
of  the  original  possessor. 

It  is  temporary  and  precarious,  and  ceases  the  moment  the  con- 
queror is  expelled :  if,  indeed,  a  title  by  conquest  can  be  said  ever 
to  have  existed,  when  the  event  has  proved  that  the  attempted  con- 
quest could  not  be  maintained. 

The  title  of  the  original  owner  is  wholly  unaffected  by  the  tem- 
porary dispossession,  and  even  during  his  dispossession  it  is  treated 
as  valid  and  subsisting  until  the  jus  post  liminii  has  been  extin- 
guished. 

The  extinction  of  the  post  liminii  is  necessary  to  ripen  the  tem- 
porary and  merely  possessory  right  of  the  conqueror  into  such  an 
ownership  of  the  territory  as  neutrals  can  recognize. 

If  these  views  be  correct,  the  case  of  a  reconquest  does  not  pre- 
sent the  instance  supposed  of  a  title  relating  back  to  the  period  of 
the  formation  of  the  intention  to  reconquer. 

But  the  further  discussion  of  this  subject  would  require  more 
time  and  space  than  can  be  devoted  to  it. 

It  might,  I  think,  be  demonstrated,  that  a  rule  which  supposes 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  261 


Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 


all  rights  of  a  sovereign,  with  respect  to  territory  subsequently  con- 
quered, to  cease  as  against  the  conqueror,  not  when  war  is  declared, 
but  when  the  war  is  prosecuted  with  the  object  of  conquest,  when 
expeditions  are  fitted  out  for  the  purpose,  and  when  the  conquest 
is  "  imminent  and  inevitable,"  is  not  susceptible  of  practicable  ap- 
plication as  a  rule  of  international  law. 

That  those  rights  must  continue  until  the  date  of  actual  conquest, 
or  of  the  treaty  of  cession,  or  else  must  cease  at  the  declaration  of 
war;  and  that  an  attempt  to  estimate  the  "  imminency  "  of  the  con- 
quest at  any  intermediate  period,  or  to  try  the  validity  of  the  exer- 
cise of  sovereign  rights,  by  calculating  the  chances  of  war  at  a 
particular  moment,  would  be  impracticable  and  illusory. 

On  the  whole,  we  are  of  opinion  that  the  right  of  Mexico  to  grant 
her  public  domain  in  California  continued  until  the  conquest  of  the 
country  by  the  United  States. 

It  is  further  urged,  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  that  grants 
made  after  the  thirteenth  of  May,  1846,  are  not  protected  by  the 
treaty  of  peace,  because  such  was  not  the  intention  of  the  parties. 

That  the  Mexican  Commissioners  who  negotiated  the  peace,  and 
who  represented  the  claimants  as  well  as  the  Mexican  Government, 
solemnly,  and  after  special  inquiry,  declared  that  none  such  existed. 
That  the  treaty  was  negotiated  on  the  faith  of  this  declaration. 

It  is  admitted  that  such  a  declaration  was  made  and  embodied  in 
i]\Qi  projet  of  the  treaty  submitted  to  the  Senate. 

Had  this  declaration  been  contained  in  the  treaty  as  adopted  and 
ratified,  it  might  very  possibly  have  been  regarded  as  a  covenant 
or  stipulation  that  such  grants  should  not  be  deemed  vahd  by  the 
United  States. 

But  the  clause  containing  it  was  struck  out  by  the  Senate  ;  not 
by  the  general  vote  which  struck  out  the  whole  of  the  tenth  article 
of  which  this  declaration  formed  a  part,  but  by  a  distinct  vote  upon 
the  question  whether  this  particular  clause  should  stand  as  a  part  of 
the  treaty. 

The  Court  cannot  assume  therefore,  that  the  treaty  was  assented 
to  by  the  United  States  on  the  faith  of  this  declaration  by  Mexico ; 
else,  why  strike  it  out  ? 


262  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 


It  may,  not  unreasonably,  be  supposed  that  the  Senate  refused 
to  allow  the  declaration  to  remain,  because  they  were  willing  that 
grants  made  after  the  thirteenth  of  May,  if  any  such  there  were, 
should  be  submitted  to  the  Courts,  and  rejected  or  confirmed,  as 
might  be  just. 

But,  assuming  that  the  treaty  was  concluded  on  the  faith  of  this 
declaration,  the  rights  of  an  individual  to  his  property  cannot  be 
affected  by  it. 

The  stipulation  in  the  treaty  by  which  the  property  of  the  inhab- 
itants of  the  ceded  territory  was  secured,  conveyed  to  them  no 
additional  rights.  "An  article  to  secure  this  object,  so  deservedly 
held  sacred  in  the  view  of  policy  as  well  as  of  justice  and  human- 
ity, is  always  required  and  never  refused."     (12  Wheat.  536.) 

"  When  such  an  article  is  submitted  to  the  Courts,  the  inquiry  is 
whether  the  land  in  controversy  was  the  property  of  the  claimant 
before  the  treaty^    (United  States  vs.  Arredondo,  6  Pet.  712.) 

If,  then,  the  land  in  controversy  was  the  private  property  of  the 
claimant  when  the  country  was  acquired,  it  must  have  remained 
such,  though  no  treaty  had  been  made.  The  United  States  do  not 
claim  to  have  acquired  the  ownership  of  any  other  property  than 
the  public  property  of  the  enemy,  nor  could  they  justly  have  de- 
manded that  Mexico  should  assent  by  the  treaty  to  the  confiscation 
of  any  property,  the  right  to  which  was  vested  in  private  individuals. 

If,  then,  the  United  States  have  been  willfully  or  accidentally 
deceived,  as  to  the  amount  of  property  held  in  private  ownership  in 
the  ceded  territory,  they  may  have  a  right  to  demand  a  return  of 
some  portion  of  the  pecuniary  equivalent  paid  by  them. 

The  fraud  or  mistake  of  the  Mexican  Commissioners  can  have  no 
effect  upon  a  private  right,  held  sacred  by  the  laws  and  usages  of 
all  civilized  nations,  which  was  not  derived  from  the  treaty,  and 
which,  had  it  been  known  to  exist,  the  United  States  would  have 
been  bound  to  respect. 

These  observations  are  made  with  reference  to  the  general  prop- 
osition maintained  at  the  bar,  viz :  that  the  declaration  by  Mexico 
that  no  grants  had  been  made  subsequent  to  May  13th,  1846,  inval- 
idated all  such  grants  to  the  same  extent  as  if  a  stipulation  to  that 
effect  had  been  embodied  in  the  treaty. 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  263 

Palmer  et  ul.  v.  United  States. 

We  proceed  to  consider  the  merits  of  the  case  at  bar. 

The  claim  was  rejected  by  the  Board  for  want  of  proof  of  the 
mesne  conveyance  through  which  the  claimants  derive  title. 

That  defect  has  been  supplied  by  evidence  taken  in  this  Court. 

In  support  of  their  title  the  clamants  have  produced  : 

1st.  A  petition,  in  the  usual  form,  addressed  to  the  Governor  by 
Benito  Dias,  for  the  land  called  "  Punta  de  Lobos,"  and  dated  April 
3d,  1845. 

On  the  margin  of  this  petition  is  an  order  for  information,  dated 
May  24th,  1845. 

2d.  The  "  informes"  of  the  officers,  as  required  by  the  Governor. 

3d.  The  formal  grant  signed  by  Pio  Pico,  Governor,  and  Jose 
Matias  Moreno,  Secretary,  and  dated  June  26th,  1846. 

The  claimants  have  also  produced  a  private  letter  from  Juan 
Bandini,  Secretary  of  the  Governor,  dated  on  the  same  day  with 
the  order  for  information  to  Benito  Dias,  in  which  he  expresses  to 
the  latter  his  regret  that  he  had  not  first  obtained  the  certificates  of 
other  officers  and  sent  them  with  the  petition,  "  in  which  case  he 
would  have  had  the  pleasure  of  sending  him  all  his  matters  con- 
cluded." 

The  signatures  to  these  documents  are  proved  by  the  testimony 
of  Pio  Pico  himself,  and  by  other  witnesses,  nor  has  any  attempt 
been  made  to  call  in  question  their  genuineness.  It  is  suggested, 
however,  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  that  they  were  signed 
subsequently  to  their  date,  and  after  the  final  subversion  of  the 
Mexican  authority  in  California. 

Benito  Dias,  the  original  grantee,  was  examined  as  a  witness  by 
the  claimants,  he  having  assigned  all  his  interest  in  the  grant. 

He  states  that  the  grant  was  in  his  handwriting,  and  that  he 
wrote  it  and  sent  it  to  the  Governor  for  signature,  in  consequence 
of  a  letter  from  Bandini,  Secretary  of  the  Governor,  stating  that 
the  grant  must  be  obtained  immediately,  as  the  country  was  in  a 
critical  state  ;  that  this  was  done  on  the  twentieth  or  twenty-first  of 
June,  at  San  Francisco ;  that  he  received  the  grant  on  the  fifth  or 
sixth  of  July,  at  Monterey ;  and  that  it  was  handed  to  him  by 
Antonio  Maria  Osio,  who  received  it  from  Cells,  the  courier  of  Dias, 
to  whom  it  had  been  delivered  by  the  Governor.     That  the  grant 


264  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

was  signed  by  Pio  Pico,  at  Santa  Barbara,  or  Buena  Ventura,  the 
courier  whom  Dias  had  dispatched  to  Los  Angeles  having  met  the 
Governor  on  the  road  at  one  or  other  of  those  places. 

Bernardino  Soto,  a  witness  in  behalf  of  the  claimants,  swears  that 
about  two  or  three  days  before  the  taking  of  Monterey,  which  was 
on  the  seventh  of  July,  1846,  he  and  his  father  were  taking  tea  at 
the  house  of  Dias,  in  Monterey,  when  Don  Antonio  Osio  came  in 
and  handed  Dias  a  letter.  That  Dias  read  its  contents,  appeared 
to  be  much  pleased,  and  said  it  was  a  grant  for  the  "  Punta  de 
Lobos."  The  witness  is  enabled  to  fix  the  date  of  this  occurrence 
by  the  circumstance  that  he  and  Dias  had  been  sent  from  Santa 
Clara  to  get  supplies  for  the  troops  at  Monterey ;  that  he  left  Santa 
Clara  on  the  fourth  of  July,  which  is  a  great  feast  day  with  the 
Californians,  and  that  he  arrived  at  Monterey  the  same  night,  when, 
as  he  relates,  Dias  received  the  title. 

Dias  further  states,  that  a  short  time  afterwards  he  showed  the 
title  to  Manuel  Dutra,  with  whom  he  left  it  as  security  for  a  loan  of 
forty  dollars.  Bernadino  Soto  confirms  this  statement,  and  testifies 
that  about  two  or  three  days  after  the  taking  of  Monterey  he,  with 
Don  Gabriel  de  la  Torre,  were  in  the  house  of  Dutra,  when  Dias 
applied  for  the  loan  of  some  money,  and  on  being  asked  for  security 
he  produced  the  title.  Dutra  gave  him  some  money,  and  Dias  left 
the  title  in  his  hands;  after  he  had  gone,  Dutra  began  to  read  the 
paper,  and  asked  the  witness  if  he  knew  the  tract  called  Punta  de 
Lobos,  to  which  he  replied  that  he  did. 

Manual  Dutra  testifies  to  the  same  facts.  He  states  that  he  had 
the  title  in  his  possession  for  more  than  a  month,  when,  on  being 
repaid,  he  returned  it  to  Diaz,  who  stated  that  he  wanted  it  for  the 
purpose  of  selhng  the  land  to  Thomas  0.  Larkin.  That  Bernardino 
Soto  and  Gabriel  de  la  Torre  were  present,  and  informed  him 
where  the  Punta  de  Lobos  was.  Gabriel  de  la  Torre  gives  sub- 
stantially the  same  account,  except  that  he  denies  having  told 
Dutra  where  the  land  was  situated,  as  he  did  not  know,  nor  did  he 
hear  Soto  tell  Dutra  its  situation. 

It  is  further  shown  by  the  claimants,  that  on  the  nineteenth  of 
September,  1846,  Benito  Diaz  conveyed  all  his  interest  in  the  land 
to  Thomas  0.  Larkin.     The  deed  to  the  latter  is  produced.     I  do 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  265 

Palmer  ct  al.  v.  United  States. 

not  understand  it  to  be  disputed  that  at  that  date  the  grant  was  in 
existence.  It  farther  appears  by  the  evidence  of  Col.  Stevenson 
that  Pio  Pico  finally  left  the  country  on  the  eighth  of  August.  The 
hypothesis  of  fraud,  therefore,  supposes  that  the  grant  was  signed 
at  some  date  between  the  twenty-fifth  of  June  and  the  eighth  of 
August. 

The  United  States  have  produced  as  a  witness,  Vicente  Gomez. 
He  swears  that  he,  Benito  Diaz,  and  Cayetano  and  Luis  Arenas, 
were  present  when  Pio  Pico  signed  the  grant.  That  it  was  signed 
after  the  Americans  took  possession  of  Monterey. 

To  rebut  this  testimony  the  claimants  have  examined,  since  the 
appeal,  Cayetano  and  Luis  Arenas. 

Both  of  these  witnesses  deny  having  been  present  on  the  occasion 
referred  to  by  Gomez.  They  state  that  they  never  saw  Pico  sign 
any  papers  after  the  seventh  of  July  ;  that  they  never  saw  the  title 
to  Punta  de  Lobos,  and  do  not  even  know  where  the  land  lies. 

Jos^  L.  Luco  and  Juan  M.  Luco,  witnesses  called  by  the  claim- 
ants, swear  that  Gomez,  in  conversation  with  them,  denied  all 
knowledge  of  the  Punta  de  Lobos  grant,  and  that  he  had  given  the 
testimony  contained  in  his  deposition.  Jose  L.  Luco  also  swears 
that  Gomez'  character  for  veracity  is  bad,  and  that  he  would  not 
believe  him  on  oath  in  matters  relating  to  land  titles. 

Jas.  C.  Crane  and  John  H.  Watson  are  the  only  remaining  wit- 
nesses introduced  by  the  United  States.  These  witnesses  swear 
that  in  the  spring  of  1851,  Benito  Diaz  stated  to  them  that  the 
grant  of  Punta  de  Lobos  was  made  after  the  hoisting  of  the  Amer- 
ican flag  at  Monterey,  and  was  antedated. 

These  declarations,  if  made  at  all,  were  made  several  years  after 
Benito  Diaz  had  parted  with  all  his  interest.  No  previous  inquiry 
as  to  them  has  been  made  of  Benito  Diaz,  when  examined  as  a  wit- 
ness. I  know  of  no  rule  of  law  by  which  the  testimony  could  be 
admitted. 

Benito  Diaz  was,  however,  reexamined  in  this  Court,  and  stated, 
with  reference  to  these  declarations,  that  he  knew  Crane  and  Wat- 
son ;  that  he  never  had  any  conversations  with  the  latter,  as  he  did 
not  speak  Spanish,  except  on  one  occasion  when  Crane  acted  as 
interpreter ;  that  he  had  always  told  Crane  that  the  title  was  good, 


266  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 


except  that  once  "  after  Gomez  had  made  statements  about  the  title, 
Crane  asked  him  if  it  was  not  made  in  August,  to  which  he  laugh- 
ingly replied:  Yes,  yes,  just  as  Gomez  says." 

The  above  comprises  all  the  testimony  adduced  by  the  United 
States  in  opposition  to  the  claim. 

No  attempt  has  been  made  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  to 
show  the  signatures  of  Pico  and  Moreno  to  be  forgeries.  It  is  in- 
sisted, however,  that  the  grant  is  antedated,  and  that  it  was  in 
fact  signed  after  the  conquest  of  the  country. 

It  is  stated,  as  we  have  seen,  by  Benito  Dias,  that  the  grant  was 
written  by  him  in  San  Francisco,  on  the  twentieth  or  twenty-first  of 
June,  and  sent  by  a  courier  to  the  Governor  for  signature. 

On  examining  the  original  grant  on  file  in  the  Surveyor  General's 
office,  we  find  that  the  date  is  in  writing  and  not  in  figures,  and  the 
words  "  veinta  y  cinco  de  Junio,"  are  obviously  written  by  the  same 
hand,  with  the  same  ink  and  at  the  same  time  as  the  rest  of  the  in- 
strument. There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Benito  Diaz,  or  whosoever 
drew  the  grant,  filled  in  the  date  at  the  time  he  drafted  the  instru- 
ment. No  trace  can  be  discovered  of  any  blank  having  been  left 
to  be  filled  up  when  the  grant  was  signed,  and  the  writing  and  the 
color  of  the  ink  are  palpably  difierent  from  those  of  the  signatures 
of  either  Pico  or  Moreno. 

The  certificate  stating  that  a  record  of  the  title  has  been  taken 
"  in  the  corresponding  book,"  is  also  in  the  same  hand-writing  as 
that  of  the  body  of  the  grant.  The  statement  of  this  fact  must 
therefore  have  been  made  by  Diaz,  like  the  insertion  of  the  date,  by 
anticipation.  If  the  statement  be  true,  where  is  the'"  correspond- 
ing book?  "  It  has  not  been  produced.  If  Moreno  can  remember 
that  he  signed  the  grant  on  the  twenty-fifth  of  tJune,  on  the  road  at 
a  distance  from  his  office,  he  could  doubtless  remember  the  fact  that 
he  recorded  it,  and  perhaps  could  explain  how  it  happened  that 
when  accompanying  the  Governor  on  a  distant  journey,  at  a  period 
of  great  public  disorder,  he  took  with  him  a  book  of  records  usually 
kept  among  the  archives  of  his  office.  He  might  at  least  tell  what 
has  become  of  the  book.  On  these  points  no  explanation  is  offered 
by  the  claimants ;  on  the  hypothesis  of  fraud,  however,  a  natural 
explanation  suggests  itself. 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  267 

Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

When  the  grant  was  fabricated,  it  was  not  considered  that  it 
could  be  proved  that  Pio  Pico  was  not  in  Los  Angeles  at  the  date 
of  the  grant.  The  certificate  of  record  was  accordingly  added  and 
Morena's  signature  procured.  When,  however,  it  became  neces- 
sary to  allege  that  the  grant  was  signed  upon  the  road,  to  meet  the 
objection  that  Pico  was  not  in  Los  Angeles  at  its  date,  it  was  too 
late  to  alter  or  erase  the  certificate  of  record,  notwithstanding 
that  the  making  of  such  a  record  was  inconsistent  with  the  other 
circumstances  under  which  it  was  requisite  to  show  the  grant  to 
have  been  executed. 

If  then  the  date  was  affixed  to  the  instrument  before  it  was 
signed,  it  affords  no  evidence  of  the  true  time  of  its  signature. 

Matias  Moreno,  however,  testifies  "  that  he  saw  the  grant  on  the 
twenty-fifth  of  June,  when  he  signed  it."  The  witness  does  not 
explicitly  state  that  he  signed  the  grant  on  the  day  that  it  bears 
date.  He  uses  the  expression  above  quoted,  which  was  doubtless 
intended  to  convey  that  idea. 

Pico  himself  was  also  examined,  but  he  answers  with  singular  re- 
serve. On  being  asked  if  the  signatures  were  genuine,  and  the 
instrument  executed  for  the  purposes  therein  mentioned,  he  merely 
replies  "  I  believe  the  signatures  are  genuine."  He  does  not  state 
when  they  were  affixed,  nor  for  Avhat  purpose. 

If  the  grant  was  signed  on  the  twenty-fifth  of  June,  the  coinci- 
dence is  extraordinary.  It  is,  of  course,  not  impossible,  but  it  is 
in  the  highest  degree  improbable,  that  Benito  Diaz,  when  he  drew 
it  in  San  Francisco  on  the  twentieth  or  twenty-first  of  June,  under 
the  expectation  that  it  would  be  signed  at  Los  Angeles,  should  have 
guessed  so  accurately  the  day  on  which  his  messenger  would  find 
the  Governor,  and  the  day  on  which  the  latter  would  sign  the  grant. 
And  particularly,  when  the  Governor  was  in  fact  met  upon  the  road 
at  a  considerable  distance  from  the  place  where  Diaz  expected  he 
would  be  found. 

It  is  also  strange  that  the  grant,  drawn  at  San  Francisco  on  the 
twentieth  or  twenty-first  of  June,  should  have  reached  the  Gov- 
ernor on  the  twenty-fifth,  on  the  road  between  Santa  Barbara  and 
Santa  Buena  Ventura,  a  journey  which  must  usually  have  required 
seven  or  eight  days  to  accomphsh,  while  it  was  not  returned  to  the 
18 


268  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

grantee  until  the  fourth  or  fifth  of  July,  and  this,  too,  at  Monterey, 
at  least  two  days  journey  nearer  than  San  Francisco  to  Santa 
Barbara. 

In  this  connection  the  nature  and  subject  matter  of  the  grant 
deserve  attention. 

In  his  petition  to  the  Governor,  Benito  Diaz,  after  specifying  the 
boundaries  of  the  tract  selected,  adds — "  observing  that  the  ruins 
of  the  presidio  of  San  Francisco,  and  the  castle,  which  are  within 
the  tract,  shall  remain  exempt  from  the  petition,  unless  it  may  be 
that  the  Governor  may  choose  to  grant  me  the  said  ruins,  promis- 
ing, if  that  be  done,  to  build  a  house,"  etc. 

By  the  marginal  order  of  May  28th,  the  Governor  refers  the 
petition,  not  only  to  the  respective  judge,  but  to  the  Military  Com- 
mander for  his  opinion  as  to  what  may  be  convenient.  The  judge 
reports  that  the  land  is  vacant,  but  as  to  the  military  points  he  can 
give  no  opinion,  not  knowing  their  ejidos  or  the  lands  appertaining 
to  them. 

The  Military  Commander  reports  in  favor  of  granting  the  land 
"  not  including  in  the  concession  the  two  military  points  of  the  pre- 
sidio and  castle  which  are  included  in  the  petition." 

The  grant,  after  reciting  that  the  petitioner  had  apphed  for  the 
land  called  Punta  de  Lobos,  concedes  to  him  in  full  property  "  the 
before  mentioned  land  —  el  espresado  terreno.^^  And  the  third 
condition  states  its  exterior  boundaries  without  reserving  the  mili- 
tary points  within  them.  He  thus  grants  not  only  the  fortifications, 
contrary  to  the  advice  of  the  military  authority  whose  opinion  he 
had  solicited,  but  he  does  not  even  insert  the  condition  proposed  by 
the  petitioner  himself,  viz :  that  a  house  should  be  built  for  the  gov- 
ernment if  the  ruins  were  granted. 

But  the  question  arises — Had  the  Governor  authority  to  make 
such  a  grant  ? 

The  second  article  of  the  law  of  1824,  declares  the  object  of  the 
law  to  be  "  those  lands  of  the  nation  which  not  being  private  prop- 
erty nor  belonging  to  any  corporation  or  town,  may  be  colonized." 
The  intention  of  Mexico  obviously  was  to  promote  the  settlement  of 
the  country,  by  the  gratuitous  distribution  of  its  vacant  and  unap- 
propriated pubUc  land.     We  accordingly  find  that  the  principal  in- 


JUNE  TERM,  185T.  269 

Palmer  ct  al.  v.  United  States. 

formation  desired  by  the  Governor,  and  communicated  by  the 
"  informes,"  is  whether  the  land  sohcited  is  "  valdio,"  or  vacant. 
If  then  the  law  and  the  Governor's  authority  only  extended  to 
"  vacant"  lands,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  sites  of  fortifications, 
occupied  as  such,  are  not  within  the  law.  It  is,  however,  urged 
that  these  fortifications  were  abandoned  and  gone  to  decay,  and 
that  their  sit^s  had  thus  reverted  to  their  previous  condition  of  va- 
cant lands.  That  they  had  no  garrisons,  is  admitted ;  but  the  ex- 
tent to  which  the  buildings  had  fallen  into  decay,  is  not  clear.  It 
is  not  disputed  that  some  eight  or  ten  cannon  remained  at  the  fort, 
and  that  its  walls  as  well  as  the  buildings  at  the  Presidio,  since 
used  as  barracks  by  the  United  States,  must  have  existed  in  a 
greater  or  less  degree  of  preservation.  But  the  question,  whether 
these  points  were  occupied  or  vacant,  does  not  depend  on  whether 
garrisons  were  maintained  in  them,  or  the  degree  of  preservation 
of  the  structures.  If  the  place  had  been  selected  and  appropriated 
by  the  Government  as  a  military  post — if  considerable  and  expens- 
ive structures  had  been  made  for  military  purposes,  the  occupation 
of  the  land  would  seem  to  be  complete,  though  every  soldier  had 
been  withdrawn  and  the  works  themselves  fallen  into  decay. 

The  fifth  article  of  the  Law  of  1824  provides  that  the  Govern- 
ment of  the  Federation  may  make  use  of  any  portion  of  the  lands 
of  the  nation  to  construct  warehouses,  arsenals,  &c.,  it  may  deem 
expedient,  with  the  consent  of  Congress.  It  is  to  be  presumed, 
therefore,  that  the  appropriation  and  occupation  of  these  military 
sites  must  have  been  made  by  the  Government  of  the  Federation. 
Until,  then,  the  Federal  Government  determined  to  abandon  them, 
no  Governor  of  a  department  would  be  at  liberty  to  treat  their  sites 
as  vacant  public  land,  because,  through  accident,  neglect  or  the  dis- 
turbed condition  of  pubUc  aifairs,  their  garrisons  might  have  been 
withdrawn,  or  the  fortifications  in  some  degree  dismantled.  The 
fort  or  castle  occupied  a  position  unmistakeably  indicated  by  nature 
as  the  site  of  a  defensive  work  for  this  harbor.  It  had  been  selected 
as  such,  perhaps,  by  the  Spanish  conquerors,  and  the  United  States 
have  since,  at  the  same  point,  erected  the  most  extensive  fortifica- 
tions on  this  coast.  It  is  not  conceivable  that  under  a  general 
power  to  distribute  vacant  lands  to  actual  settlers,  it  could  have 


270  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT 


Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 


been  intended  to  clothe  the  Governor  with  discretionary  power  to 
give  to  a  private  individual  a  spot  so  necessary  to  the  national 
defense,  which  had  long  been  used  for  the  purpose,  and  on  which 
the  cannon  of  the  nation  still  remained. 

If,  then,  we  are  right  in  supposing  that  the  Governor  had  no 
authority  to  grant  the  fortifications  of  the  country  to  private  indi- 
viduals, the  fact  that  this  grant  purports  to  do  so  becomes  a  significant 
and  suspicious  circumstance.  Indeed,  it  would  seem  incredible  that 
a  Governor,  intending  bond  fide  to  exercise  the  authority  entrusted 
to  him  for  the  good  of  the  nation,  should,  at  a  time  of  war  and 
imminent  peril,  have  consented  to  grant  to  a  private  person  the  site  of 
so  important  a  fortification  ;  that  he  should  have  done  this  on  the  road 
where,  by  accident,  both  he  and  his  secretary  were  found ;  that  he 
should  have  signed  a  paper  previously  drawn  up  for  him  by  the 
grantee,  and  dated  at  a  place,  and,  in  all  probability,  at  a  time  dif- 
ferent from  those  at  which  it  purported  to  be  executed ;  that  he 
should  have  done  this  contrary  to  the  advice  of  the  military  author- 
ity whose  opinion  he  had  solicited,  and  without  securing  the  import- 
ant benefits  to  the  Government  which  the  petitioner  had  himself 
offered,  viz:  the  erection  of  a  house  ;  and  finally,  that  no  record 
or  official  note  of  so  important  a  transaction  should  anywhere  be 
found  in  the  archives  of  the  Government. 

Had  Pio  Pico  himself  given  any  satisfactory  explanation  of  these 
circumstances,  our  suspicions  might  have  been  dispelled.  But  the 
witness  mentions  no  one  of  the  facts  sought  to  be  established  by  the 
claimants,  except  only  that  the  signatures  are  genuine,  and  of  this 
he  only  expresses  his  "  behef." 

If  the  date  was  affixed  to  the  grant  by  Dias  himself,  when  he 
drew  it  on  the  twentieth  or  twenty-first  of  June,  Moreno's  testimony 
that  he  signed  it  on  the  twenty-fifth  must  be  false,  unless  we  sup- 
pose an  almost  impossible  coincidence  to  have  occurred. 

If  Moreno,  the  Governor's  secretary,  has  sworn  falsely,  the 
whole  case  is  tainted  by  the  fraud. 

The  grant  appearing  to  have  been  dated  by  Dias  himself,  before 
its  execution,  Moreno's  testimony  being  rejected,  and  the  Governor 
being  silent  on  the  subject,  the  only  evidence  to  show  its  execution 
before  the  change  of  sovereignty  is  that  of  Dias  himself,  Bernadino 
Soto,  Manuel  Dutra  and  Gabriel  de  la  Torre. 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  271 

Palmer  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

No  one  of  these  witnesses  pretends  to  have  seen  the  grant  before 
the  fifth  or  sixth  of  July. 

Dias,  in  his  first  deposition,  states  that  he  received  the  grant  two 
or  three  weeks  after  its  execution.  It  is  only  when  examined  in 
this  Court,  that  he  remembers  having  received  it  on  the  fourth  or 
fifth  of  July,  within  nine  or  ten  days  after  its  execution. 

Gabriel  de  la  Torre,  Dutra  and  Soto  swear  that  they  saw  the  grant 
a  few  days  after  the  taking  of  Monterey,  when  Dutra  was  asked  to 
lend  forty  dollars  upon  it.  The  only  witnesses  who  saw  it  on  the 
fifth  or  sixth  of  July  are  Dias  and  Soto. 

The  conclusion,  then,  that  the  grant  was  executed  before  the 
seventh  of  July,  must  be  founded  on  the  testimony  of  Dias  and 
Soto  alone. 

We  are  deeply  sensible  of  the  fact  that  their  testimony  is  positive 
and  circumstantial ;  that  Soto's  character  has  not  been  impeached, 
and  that  the  statement  of  Gomez,  that  Pico  signed  the  grant  in 
August,  in  the  presence  of  himself  and  the  two  Arenas — is  contra- 
dicted by  the  latter — that  Gomez'  character  is  impeached — and  his 
testimony,  therefore,  entitled  to  but  little  consideration. 

But  the  inquiry  recurs :  Can  we,  on  the  faith  of  Dias'  and  Soto's 
testimony  alone,  confirm  this  claim,  under  all  the  circumstances  ? 
We  are  of  opinion  that  we  cannot. 

In  the  investigation  of  this  class  of  cases,  we  have  been  painfully 
impressed  with  a  sense  of  the  entire  unreliability  of  many  of  the 
regular  and,  so  to  speak,  professional  witnesses  by  whom  they  are 
supported,  and,  in  some  rare  instances,  attacked.  When,  therefore, 
a  grant  is  presented,  of  which  the  archives  contain  no  record,  for 
land  of  which  no  possession  has  been  taken,  and  to  which  no  claim 
of  ownership  has  been  asserted  during  the  former  Government,  the 
suspicion  that  it  has  been  fabricated  since  the  change  of  Govern- 
ment is  irresistibly  suggested.  That  such  has  been  the  case,  in 
some  instances,  is  notorious. 

That  such  a  fraud  was  easy  while  the  former  Governors  of  this 
country  were  alive  and  accessible,  is  obvious. 

When,  therefore,  the  grant  is  like  the  present,  one  of  an  extra- 
ordinary character — when  it  appears  that  the  Governor,  even  if  he 
did  not  exceed  his  authority,  acted  with  entire  disregard  of  the 


272  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Fitch  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

interests  of  his  country — we  have  a  right  to  demand  a  full  and 
satisfactory  explanation  of  the  circumstances.  When  we  find 
Moreno  testifying  to  a  fact  which  is  in  the  highest  degree  improba- 
ble, the  Governor  not  only  withholding  explanation,  but  silent  or 
evasive  as  to  the  real  point  in  controversy — the  grantee  himself 
giving  a  loose  and  inaccurate  statement  of  the  time  when  he 
received  the  grant,  although  four  years  afterwards,  the  date  and 
the  circumstances  are  fresh  in  his  memory — when,  in  addition  to 
aU  this,  we  consider  the  notorious  facility  with  which  testimony  like 
that  in  support  of  this  claim  can  be  procured — we  are  unable  to 
resist  the  conclusion  that  the  bond  fide  character  of  this  grant  has 
not  been  established. 

Whether  the  bare  reception  of  a  paper  purporting  to  convey  a 
title  at  a  time  when  the  grantor  had  lost  all  practical  dominion  over 
the  land  conveyed,  when  no  possession  was  taken,  or  could  have 
been  taken,  by  reason  of  the  subversion  of  the  grantor's  authority 
by  a  conquest  of  the  country,  conveys  such  a  right  of  property  as 
the  conqueror,  by  the  principles  of  public  law,  is  bound  to  respect, 
may  be  doubted.     That  question  it  is  not  now  necessary  to  discuss. 


JOSEFA  CARRILLO  DE  FITCH  et  al,  claiming  the  Rancho 
Parage  del  Arroyo,  Appellants,  vs.  THE  UNITED 
STATES. 

This  claim  seems  to  have  been  abandoned. 

Claim  for  a  half  league  of  land  in  San  Francisco  county,  rejected 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  claimants. 

E.  0.  Crosby,  for  Appellants. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  grant  in  this  case  purports  to  have  been  made  July  26th, 
1846.     No  evidence  in  support  of  the  claim  was  offered  to  the 


DECEMBER  TERM,  185T.  273 

Executor  and  Heirs  of  Yturbide  v.  United  States. 

Board,  except  the  deposition  of  Pablo  de  la  Guerra  to  the  effect 
that  the  signatures  are  genuine. 

The  original  grantees  were  Enrique  Domingo  Fitcli  and  Francisco 
Guerrero. 

There  is  no  evidence  of  the  decease  of  either  of  these  persons, 
or  any  connection  or  privity  of  estate  between  them  and  the  pres- 
ent claimants.  The  claim  was  rejected  by  the  Board  for  this  reason 
in  November,  1854.  No  attempt  has  been  made  to  supply  the 
omission  in  this  Court.  The  claim  in  fact  seems  to  have  been 
abandoned. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  consider  the  other  objections  which  might 
be  urged  to  its  validity. 

The  decree  of  the  Board  must  be  affirmed. 


EXECUTOR  AND  HEIRS  OF  AGUSTIN  DE  YTURBIDE, 

CLAIMING  FOUR  HUNDRED   SQUARE  LEAGUES  OF  LAND    IN    UpPER 

California,  ClaixMAnts,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

The  claimants  omitted  to  file  with  the  Clerk  a  notice  of  their  intention  to  prose- 
cute the  appeal  from  the  decision  of  the  Board  of  Land  Commissioners,  within 
the  six  months  prescribed  by  the  Act  of  1852  :  Held,  that  the  Court  was  with- 
out jurisdiction  over  the  cause. 

This  claim  was  rejected  by  the  Board. 

Crockett  &  Page  and  Sloan  &  Hartman,  for  Claimants. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  for  United  States. 

The  claim  in  this  case  having  been  rejected  by  the  Board,  the 
transcript  was  duly  filed  in  the  Clerk's  office  in  this  Court  on  the 
second  of  June,  1855.  No  notice  of  appeal  was  filed  by  the  claim- 
ants within  six  months  thereafter  as  required  by  law,  but  on  the 
30th  of  April,  1856,  a  motion  was  made  by  the  claimants'  counsel  for 
leave  to  file  such  notice  nunc  pro  tunc,  and  to  prosecute  the  appeal. 


274  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Executor  and  Heirs  of  Yturbide  v.  United  States. 

No  order  or  decree  dismissing  the  appeal  had  been  obtained  by  the 
District  Attorney,  and  the  circumstances  attending  the  omission  to 
file  the  notice  were  such  as  to  have  induced  the  Court  at  once  to 
grant  the  apphcation,  if  it  had  possessed  any  discretion  on  the  sub- 
ject. Much  doubt  was  however  entertained  by  the  Court  whether 
it  could  on  any  showing  disregard  what  seemed  the  positive  require- 
ments of  the  statute. 

The  motion  was  therefore,  with  the  acquiescence  of  the  District 
Attorney,  granted,  in  order  that  if  the  Court  had  any  discretion  on 
the  subject  it  might  appear  to  have  been  exercised  in  favor  of  the 
application,  and  in  order  that  testimony  on  the  merits  might  be 
taken  and  the  whole  case  submitted  to  the  Supreme  Court  in  such 
a  form  as  to  enable  them  finally  to  dispose  of  it  when  for  the  first 
time  brought  before  them. 

It  was  however  expressly  mentioned,  that  the  point  as  to  the  juris- 
diction of  the  Court  to  grant  the  motion  was  reserved  until  the  final 
hearing,  and  that  if  the  Court  should  then  be  of  opinion  that  it  had 
no  power  to  allow  a  notice  of  appeal  to  be  filed  after  the  expiration 
of  six  months  from  the  fifing  of  the  transcript,  the  claim  would  be 
rejected  for  want  of  jurisdiction.  This  question  must  therefore  be 
now  disposed  of. 

By  the  twelfth  section  of  the  Act  of  1851,  it  was  provided,  that 
to  entitle  "  either  party  to  a  review  of  the  decision  of  the  Board  of 
Commissioners,  notice  of  the  intention  to  file  a  petition  in  the  Dis- 
trict Court  shall  be  entered  on  the  journal  of  the  Board  within  sixty 
days  after  the  decision  of  the  claim  has  been  notified  to  the  parties, 
and  the  petition  shall  be  filed  in  the  District  Court  within  six  months 
after  the  decision  has  been  rendered." 

The  mode  above  prescribed  for  removing  the  cause  was  altered 
by  the  Act  of  1852.  In  that  law  it  is  provided  "  that  the  Com- 
missioners shall  cause  a  transcript  of  their  proceedings  and  decision 
to  be  filed  with  the  Clerk  of  the  District  Court,  and  that  the  fifing 
of  such  transcript  shall  ipso  facto  operate  as  an  appeal  for  the  party 
against  whom  the  decision  shall  have  been  rendered ;  that  if  such 
decision  shall  be  against  the  private  claimant  it  shaU  be  his  duty  to 
file  a  notice  within  six  months  thereafter  of  his  intention  to  prose- 
cute the  appeal,  and  if  the  decision  shall  be  against  the  United 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  275 

Executor  and  Heirs  of  Yturbide  v.  United  States. 

States,  it  shall  be  the  dutj  of  the  Attorney  General,  within  six 
months  after  receiving  a  copy  of  the  transcript,  (directed  by  the 
Act  to  be  sent  to  him  by  the  Board)  to  cause  a  notice  to  be  filed 
with  the  Clerk  aforesaid  that  the  appeal  will  be  prosecuted  by  the 
United  States.  And  on  the  failure  of  either  party  to  file  such 
notice  with  the  Clerk,  the  appeal  shall  he  regarded  as  dismissed.'''' 

The  Acts  of  1824, 1828  and  1830,  relating  to  lands  in  Missouri, 
Arkansas  and  Florida,  provided  that  all  claims  within  their  purview 
should  be  brought  before  the  Courts  authorized  to  adjudicate  upon 
them,  within  a  specified  period.  Under  these  acts,  it  has  always 
been  held  that  the  Courts  had  no  jurisdiction  over  petitions  not  pre- 
sented within  the  time  limited. 

In  United  States  v.  Marvin  (3  How.  623)  it  is  said  by  the  Court : 
"  The  policy  of  Congress  was  to  settle  the  claims  in  as  short  a  time 
as  practicable,  so  as  to  enable  the  Government  to  sell  the  public 
lands,  which  could  not  be  done  with  propriety  until  the  private 
claims  were  ascertained.  As  these  were  many  in  number,  and  for 
large  quantities,  no  choice  was  left  to  the  Government  but  their 
speedy  settlement  and  severance  from  the  public  domain.  Such 
has  been  its  anxious  policy  throughout,  as  appears  from  almost  every 
law  passed  on  the  subject." 

Similar  observations  are  repeated  in  Villabolos  v.  The  United 
States,  6  Howard,  91. 

In  furtherance  of  this  pohcy  it  was  provided  by  the  Act  of  1851, 
that  all  lands,  the  claims  to  which  shall  not  be  presented  to  the 
Board  within  two  years  from  the  date  of  the  act,  shall  be  deemed 
part  of  the  public  domain,  and  after  the  decision,  though  an  appeal 
was  allowed,  the  party  to  be  entitled  to  it  was  required  to  file  a 
notice  of  his  intention  to  prosecute  within  sixty  days  after  the  de- 
cision has  been  notified  to  him,  and  to  file  his  petition  in  the  Dis- 
trict Court  within  six  months  from  the  date  of  the  decision. 

These  provisions  were  clearly  limitations.  Nor  will  it  be  con- 
tended that  under  them  either  party  could  file  a  petition  or  other- 
wise prosecute  his  appeal  after  the  expiration  of  the  six  months 
prescribed  by  law. 

The  alteration  in  the  mode  of  taking  the  appeal  made  by  the 
law  of  1852  above  referred  to,  had  for  its  principal  object  to  relieve 


276  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


Executor  and  Heirs  of  Yturbide  v.  United  States. 

the  claimants  of  the  burden  and  expense  of  procuring  copies  of  the 
transcripts  to  be  made,  and  to  allow  to  the  Attorney  General  a 
longer  time  to  determine  whether  an  appeal  should  be  prosecuted 
than  the  sixty  days  within  which  the  notice  was  required  to  be  en- 
tered on  the  journals  of  the  Board.  It  was  accordingly  provided 
that  the  Board  should  cause  the  transcripts  to  be  made  out  and  filed 
in  the  District  Court,  and  that  such  fihng  should  ipso  facto  operate 
as  an  appeal.  As,  however,  Congress  did  not  mean  to  enact  that 
every  case  should  be  appealed,  whether  the  party  against  whom  the 
decision  had  been  made  desired  it  or  not,  and  as  the  provisional 
appeal  could  not  continue  forever,  the  same  period  for  filing  the 
notice  of  an  intention  to  prosecute  it,  or  to  profit  by  the  appeal 
which  had  thus  by  operation  of  law  been  taken,  was  prescribed,  as 
had  previously  been  assigned  for  filing  the  petition  in  the  District 
Court. 

It  was  therefore  not  only  made  the  duty  of  the  Attorney  Gen- 
eral or  the  claimant  to  file  such  notice  within  the  time  limited,  but 
it  was  provided  that  on  the  failure  of  either  party  to  file  such  a 
notice,  the  appeal  "  should  be  regarded  as  dismissed." 

We  think  that  by  these  provisions  Coagress  intended  to  prescribe 
a  rule  of  action  to  the  Court,  which  it  is  not  at  liberty  to  evade  or 
to  disregard.  That  some  limitation  on  the  rights  of  appeal  to  a 
definite  period  is  necessary  in  all  cases,  is  obvious.  That  it  is 
pecuharly  necessary  in  this  class  of  cases,  and  that  it  has  been 
restricted  vfithin  limits  much  narrower  than  those  allowed  in  ordi- 
nary suits  by  all  the  Acts  of  Congress  previously  passed,  is  equally 
evident.  When,  therefore,  we  find  the  Act  of  1851  allowing  a  time 
for  appeal  still  shorter  than  that  prescribed  in  previous  acts,  it  is 
difficult  to  beheve  that  Congress,  by  the  amended  Act  of  1852,  in- 
tended to  depart  from  a  policy  so  well  settled,  and  so  necessary, 
and  to  permit  the  Court  to  allow  the  appeal  to  be  prosecuted  when- 
ever in  its  judgment  the  party  desirous  of  appealing  might  suffi- 
ciently excuse  his  omission. 

If  it  be  said  that  hard  cases  may  arise,  and  that  such  a  power 
might  with  safety  and  propriety  be  committed  to  the  Courts.  It 
may  be  answered — 1st,  that  hard  cases  must  always  occur  under  any 
general  rule  of  law,  however  beneficent  or  necessary  it  may  be ; 


DECEMBER  TEEM,  1857.  277 

Executor  and  Heirs  of  Yturbide  v.  United  States. 

and  2d,  that  Courts  have  never  felt  themselves  at  liberty  to  dis- 
pense with  express  provisions  of  law,  whether  in  statutes  of  limita- 
tions or  in  those  regulating  appeals  or  in  others,  upon  any  equitable 
ground.  To  this  effect  is  the  language  of  the  Supreme  Court  in 
Saltmarsh  v.  TutMll,  (12  How.  389)  and  in  The  Bank  of  Ala- 
hama  v.  Ballon  (9  How.  522)  the  Court  decided  that  it  could  not 
engraft  on  a  statute  of  limitations  an  exception  not  found  therein, 
however  reasonable  and  just  it  might  be. 

It  is  argued  that  the  case  at  bar  is  to  be  distinguished  from  those 
under  the  statutes  of  1824,  1828  and  1830,  inasmuch  as  the  latter 
limited  the  time  within  which  the  petition  was  to  be  filed,  which  was 
the  commencement  of  the  suit ;  whereas,  by  the  Act  of  1852  the 
filing  of  the  transcript  ipso  facto  constitutes  an  appeal.  The  Court 
therefore  has  jurisdiction  of  the  suit,  and  the  notice  is  not  necessary 
to  confer  it.  Hence,  it  is  argued,  the  filing  of  the  notice  is  not  in- 
dispensable to  the  retention  of  the  cause  in  Court  after  it  has  been 
properly  brought  there. 

It  is  true  that  the  filing  of  the  transcript  operates  as  an  appeal, 
and  the  cause  is  properly  in  Court.  But  the  appeal  so  taken  and 
the  jurisdiction  so  acquired,  are  obviously  but  temporary  and  provis- 
ional. The  very  law  which  declares  that  the  filing  of  the  transcript 
shall  operate  as  an  appeal,  prescribes  the  period  and  the  conditions 
of  its  continuance  in  Court,  and  though  the  appeal  is  pending  and 
the  Court  has  jurisdiction  for  six  months,  yet  if  during  that  time  no 
notice  be  filed,  the  same  law  requires  that  the  appeal  shall  be 
deemed  to  be  no  longer  pending,  or  that  it  shall  be  regarded  as  dis- 
missed. The  law  which  gave  vitality  to  the  appeal  during  the 
period  limited,  peremptorily  deprives  it  of  life  unless  certain  condi- 
tions necessary  to  continue  its  existence  be  fulfilled. 

Such  we  consider  would  be  the  construction  of  statutory  provis- 
ions hke  these,  even  if  they  related  to  ordinary  suits  before  a  Court 
of  general  and  superior  jurisdiction. 

But  they  should  a  fortiori  be  so  construed  in  this  case,  where 
the  Court  has  but  a  special  and  limited  jurisdiction  derived  from  the 
statute  alone,  and  to  be  exercised,  like  the  jurisdiction  of  an  inferior 
Court,  only  in  the  manner  and  to  the  extent  prescribed  by  the 
statute. 


278  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Executor  and  Heirs  of  Yturbide  v.  United  States. 

The  claimants'  counsel  have  adduced  in  support  of  their  con- 
struction of  the  statute,  an  illustration  from  the  Practice  of  the 
Court  of  Chancery  in  New  York.  It  was  by  the  rules  of  that 
Court  provided,  that  if  the  plaintiff  did  not  reply  within  a  certain 
time,  ''  he  should  be  precluded  from  replying."  The  Court,  how- 
ever, under  special  circumstances,  grants  leave  to  file  a  replication. 

But  this  rule  is  obviously  a  mere  rule  of  practice  framed  by  the 
Court  for  its  own  government.  Such  rules,  even  when  prescribed 
by  a  superior  tribunal,  the  Court  has  the  power  to  modify  to  meet 
the  exigencies  of  special  cases — a  power  which  it  does  not  possess 
over  the  positive  requirements  of  a  statute.  (12  Peters,  472  ;  12 
How.  389 ;  9  Id.  522.)  Moreover,  the  practice  under  this  rule 
shows  that  it  was  merely  intended  to  preclude  the  right  of  replying 
as  of  course,  but  that  it  was  not  intended  to  take  away  the  right  in 
all  cases.  The  Court  which  made  the  rule  expounds  its  intention 
and  meaning,  and  establishes  the  practice  under  it. 

But  if  the  views  heretofore  expressed  be  correct,  the  provision 
in  the  Act  of  1852  is  not  to  be  limited  to  a  rule  of  practice  estab- 
lished by  the  Court,  but  is  a  statute  of  limitations  enacted  by  the 
Legislature.  It  prescribes  a  period  within  which  the  party  is  to 
adopt  the  appeal  which  the  Government  has  provisionally  taken  for 
him,  and  which  is  allowed  to  be  pending  and  awaiting  his  action  for 
a  specified  time.  His  failure  to  adopt  this  appeal  by  filing  the  re- 
quired notice,  puts  him  in  the  same  position  as  if  he  had  been  him- 
self required  to  take  it  within  the  same  period,  and  had  omitted  to 
do  so. 

We  are  very  sensible  of  the  hardship  of  this  and  similar  cases. 
We  regret  that  we  have  no  power  to  relieve  them. 

Under  the  construction  we  have,  felt  compelled  to  give  to  the 
statute,  we  have  no  alternative  but  to  dismiss  the  claim. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  279 

Pico  ct  al.  V.  United  States. 

FRANCISCO  PICO  et  al.^  claiming  the  Rancho  Las  Cala- 
veras, Appellants,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

Although  the  final  grant  in  this  case  was  not  issued  until  the  seventh  of  July, 
1846,  which  date  the  political  branch  of  our  Government  seems  to  have  indi- 
cated as  the  period  of  the  actual  conquest  of  California,  yet,  the  Governor 
having  ordered  the  title  to  issue  on  the  eleventh  of  June,  1846,  the  claim  pre- 
sents an  equity  Avhich  must  be  respected  by  the  United  States. 

Claim  for  eleven  leagues  of  land  in  Tuolumne  county,  rejected  by 
the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimants. 

Stanly  &  King,  for  Appellants. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  expediente  produced  from  the  archives  in  this  case  contains 
the  following  documents : 

1st.  A  petition  by  the  claimant  to  the  Justice  of  the  Peace  and 
MiUtary  Commander,  Don  Juan  A.  Sutter,  requesting  a  favorable 
report  for  the  grant  of  the  land  mentioned  in  the  petition  and  delin- 
eated on  the  map  which  accompanied  it. 

This  petition  is  dated  May  1st,  1846.  In  the  margin  of  this 
petition  is  a  certificate  by  Sutter,  dated  on  the  same  day,  that  the 
land  solicited  is  vacant. 

2d.  A  petition  by  the  claimant  to  the  Sub-Prefect  of  the  Second 
District,  soliciting  his  report  to  accompany  the  representation  and 
diseno  previously  presented  to  the  judicial  officer  of  said  estabhsh- 
ment,  from  whom  the  petitioner  had  already  obtained  a  certificate, 
so  that  further  proceedings  may  be  taken  with  a  thorough  under- 
standing of  the  matter.     This  petition  is  dated  May  8th,  1846. 

In  the  margin  is  a  note  by  Francisco  Guerrero,  dated  May  12th, 
1846,  in  which  he  dechnes  to  act  in  the  matter,  not  having  the 
necessary  authority,  and  he  refers  it  to  the  Prefect  of  the  Second 
District  "  to  resolve  what  he  shall  deem  proper." 

3d.  A  report  of  the  Prefect,  Manuel  Castro,  dated  May  18th, 
1846,  in  which  he  states,  that  in  view  of  the  petition,  the  report  of 
the  Sub-Prefect,  and  that  of  the  Judge  of  Nueva  Helvetia,  the 
qualifications  of  the  petitioner,  and  everything  else,  he  is  of  opinion 


280  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Pico  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

that  the  said  party  may  be  granted  the  ownership  of  said  land,  "  if 
it  shall  appear  convenient  to  your  Excellency." 

4th.  An  order  of  the  Governor  as  follows : 

"  In  view  of  the  reports  contained  in  this  expediente  in  favor  of 
the  interested  party,  let  the  title  issue  to  secure  the  ownership,  with- 
out prejudice  to  what  may  belong  to  the  bordering  land  owners. 

"Angeles,  June  11th,  1846."  "  Pico." 

The  claimant  has  also  produced  the  final  title  issued  in  pursuance 
of  the  above  order.  It  is  dated,  however,  on  the  twentieth  of  July, 
1846,  about  thirteen  days  after  the  capture  of  Monterey. 

The  claim  was  rejected  by  the  Board,  on  the  ground  that  the 
final  title  issued  after  the  occupation  of  the  country  by  the  Amer- 
ican forces. 

It  must  be  admitted,  that  after  California  was  subjected  to  the 
American  arms,  no  Mexican  authority  could  do  any  act  which  would 
affect  the  rights  of  the  United  States  to  the  public  property.  (^The 
United  States  vs.  Fremont,  17  How.  563.) 

"  The  civil  and  municipal  oiScers  who  continued  to  exercise  their 
functions,  did  so  under  the  authority  of  the  American  Govern- 
ment."    (76.) 

It  is  not,  however,  easy  to  determine  the  precise  period  at  which 
the  Mexican  authority  ceased  de  facto  to  exist,  and  at  which  Cali- 
fornia must  be  deemed  to  have  been  subjected  to  our  arms. 

The  political  branch  of  our  Government  seems  to  have  indicated 
the  seventh  of  July,  1846,  the  date  of  the  capture  of  Monterey, 
as  the  period  at  which  the  conquest  is  deemed  to  have  been  effected. 
(Act  of  1851,  sec.  14.)  It  is  to  be  considered,  however,  that  Los 
Angeles,  the  capital  of  the  country,  was  not  taken  until  some 
months  later.  The  Governor  continued  in  the  exercise  of  his  func- 
tions until  August,  and  regular  sessions  of  the  Departmental  Assem- 
bly seem  to  have  been  held  for  some  time  afterwards. 

But  assuming  the  earlier  date  as  the  period  when  the  powers  of 
the  Mexican  functionaries  ceased,  the  question  arises,  whether  the 
circumstance  that  the  final  document  issued  thirteen  days  after 
taking  of  Monterey  is  a  fatal  objection  to  the  claim. 

From  the  expediente  already  referred  to,  we  find  that  as  early 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  281 

United  States  v.  Bennett. 

as  the  month  of  May,  all  the  proceedings  were  had  preliminary  to 
the  issuance  of  the  final  document.  A  petition  was  presented  with 
favorable  reports  and  accompanied  by  a  disefio,  and  the  Governor, 
on  the  eleventh  of  June,  accedes  in  effect  to  the  petition,  and  orders 
the  final  title  to  be  issued  to  secure  the  ownership. 

So  far  as  the  Governor's  discretion  was  concerned,  he  had  fully 
exercised  it,  and  had  determined  to  grant  the  land.  If  the  dis- 
turbed state  of  public  affairs,  or  the  neglect  of  the  Secretary, 
prevented  the  performance  of  the  merely  ministerial  act  of  drawing 
out  the  title  in  form  and  presenting  it  for  signature  to  the  Governor, 
it  seems  to  me  that  such  an  omission  ought  not  to  invalidate  the 
inchoate  or  incipient  title  which  the  petitioner  had  acquired  by  the 
previous  proceedings. 

In  the  case  of  Rafael  Sanchez  vs.  The  United  States,  which 
depended  on  the  same  question  as  that  raised  in  this  case,  the 
Judge  of  the  Southern  District  of  this  State  decreed  in  favor  of 
the  claimant.  That  decision  has  been  acquiesced  in  by  the  United 
States  and  the  appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court  dismissed.  In  the 
reasoning  and  conclusions  of  the  Court  in  that  case  I  entirely  con- 
cur, and  am  of  opinion  that  the  petition,  the  favorable  reports,  and 
the  order  of  the  Governor  directing  the  title  to  issue,  followed  by 
the  actual  issuance  of  the  title  at  a  period  when  the  Governor 
could  hardly  have  anticipated  the  consequences  of  the  capture  of 
Monterey,  and  certainly  before  he  could  have  been  fully  satisfied 
that  the  sovereignty  had  finally  passed  away  from  Mexico,  consti- 
tute an  equitable  title  which  the  United  States  must  respect. 

A  decree  of  confirmation  must  be  entered. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  MARY  S.  BEN- 
NETT, CLAIMING  TWO  TRACTS  OF  LAND  IN  SaNTA  ClARA 
COUNTY. 

Where  a  decree,  through  mistake  or  accident,  does  not  express  the  judgment  of 
the  Court,  it  may  be  corrected  on  motion  made  after  the  expiration  of  the 
term  at  which  it  was  enrolled. 


282  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Bennett. 

This  was  a  motion  to  amend  the  decree  of  confirmation  so  as  to 
conform  to  the  decree  of  the  Board  of  Commissioners. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  and  William  Bland- 
ING,  for  the  Motion. 

VoLNEY  E.  Howard,  against  it. 

When  this  cause  was  called  in  its  order  on  the  calendar,  the  Dis- 
trict Attorney  stated  to  the  Court  that  ho  had  no  objection  to  make 
to  the  affirmance  of  the  decree  of  the  Board  and  to  the  confirma- 
tion of  the  claim.  An  order  confirming  the  claim  was  thereupon 
entered  upon  the  minutes,  and  the  parties  were  directed  to  draft 
the  decree  and  present  it  to  the  Judge  for  signature,  first  submit- 
ting it  to  the  District  Attorney  for  examination. 

A  draft  decree  was  accordingly  presented  to  the  Judge,  with  an 
endorsement  thereon,  signed  by  the  District  Attorney,  that  the 
same  was  correct.  It  was  thereupon  signed  by  the  Judge  without 
examination,  and  in  entire  reliance  upon  the  consent  of  the  District 
Attorney  that  the  decision  of  the  Board  should  be  affirmed,  and 
his  certificate  that  the  form  of  the  decree  was  correct. 

IS^otice  having  been  received  from  the  Attorney  General  that  the 
United  States  would  not  prosecute  the  appeal  from  the  decision  of 
the  Board,  and  a  decree  in  this  Court  having  been  made  as  above 
stated  before  the  reception  of  the  notice,  the  District  Attorney 
entered  into  a  stipulation  and  consent  that  no  appeal  should  be 
taken  from  the  decree  of  this  Court,  and  that  the  claimants  might 
proceed  as  under  a  final  decree. 

After  this  stipulation  was  entered  into,  it  was  discovered  by  the 
District  Attorney  that,  through  error  or  accident,  the  description  of 
the  land  contained  in  the  decree  of  this  Court  was  widely  different 
from  that  contained  in  the  decree  of  the  Board ;  and  that  the  land 
confirmed  by  this  Court  is  of  larger  extent  and  different  situation 
from  that  confirmed  to  the  claimants  by  the  Board — the  claim  to 
which  alone  he  intended  to  consent  should  be  affirmed,  and  the 
United  States  had  consented  not  further  to  litigate. 

A  motion  is  now  made  to  amend  the  decree  signed  by  this  Court, 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  283 

Uuited  States  v.  Bennett. 

as  above  stated,  so  as  to  make  it  conform  to  the  decision  of  the 
Board.  It  is  resisted,  on  the  ground  that  the  term  having  expired, 
the  Court  has  no  power  to  alter  or  amend  its  final  decrees. 

If  the  application  were  intended  to  procure  a  revision  and  cor- 
rection of  any  errors,  either  in  law  or  fact,  or  to  change  opinions 
once  given,  or  to  obtain  a  new  decision,  it  would  of  course  be  denied. 
Even  if  a  Court  had  no  jurisdiction  over  the  cause,  the  judgment 
is  binding  until  reversed  on  error.     (6  How.  31.) 

But  in  this  case,  so  far  as  the  Court  can  be  said  to  have  passed 
at  all  upon  the  questions  submitted  to  it,  its  judgment  and  intention 
were  that  the  decision  of  the  Board  should  be  affirmed.  It  cer- 
tainly cannot  be  said  to  have  intended  to  depart  from  that  decision 
by  confirming  to  the  claimant  another  and  a  different  tract. 

Such  was  the  obvious  effect  of  the  first  order  of  confirmation 
directed  in  open  Court  to  be  made,  and  such  was  supposed  to  be 
the  effect  of  the  decree  signed  on  the  faith  of  the  District  Attorney's 
certificate  of  its  correctness.  If,  then,  through  accident  or  the 
mistake  of  the  District  Attorney,  the  decree  approved  by  him  and 
signed  by  the  Court  does  not  describe  the  land  which  he  was  willing 
should  be  confirmed,  and  which  the  Court  supposed  it  was  confirm- 
ing, it  would  seem  to  present  a  case  of  mistake  which  the  Court 
after  enrollment  has  the  power  to  correct.  In  so  doing  it  makes 
no  new  decree,  nor  does  it  review  or  reverse  any  former  judgment, 
nor  make  a  new  decision  on  points  already  passed  upon.  It  merely 
makes  the  written  decree  conform  to  what  was  in  fact  the  judgment 
of  the  Court,  and  enters  a  decree  now,  such  as  it  intended  to  enter 
then. 

The  case  of  Marr^s  Administrator  vs.  Miller^s  Executor  (1 
Homing  &  Munf.  204)  is  directly  in  point. 

In  that  case  a  decree  was  improperly  entered  at  a  previous  term 
by  the  inattention  of  counsel  who  drew  it.  It  was  sought  to  be 
amended  on  motion : 

Per  Curiam — "  The  practice  of  this  Court  heretofore  and  of  the 
Federal  Courts  in  this  place  has  been  inquired  into,  and  it  appears 
that  in  all  cases  where,  by  mistake,  an  entry  has  been  made,  it  has 
been  rectified  on  motion.  And  where  any  error  has  been  com- 
mitted by  the  officers  of  the  Court,  or  gentlemen  of  the  bar^  it  has^ 
19 


284  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COUET, 

IlDited  Saies  v.  PolLtck  et  al. 

been  corrected  on  motion.  Let  the  decree  be  set  aside  and  entered 
now  as  it  should  have  been." 

A  similar  power  appears  to  have  been  exercised  by  Lord  Hard- 
wicke,  in  Kemp  vs.  Squire^  (1  Vesey,  Jr.  205)  and  in  other  cases 
cited  in  the  brief  on  the  part  of  the  United  States. 

On  the  whole,  we  think  that  the  case  presented  is  one  where  the 
Court  has  the  authority  to  amend  its  decree  ;  and  that  a  decree 
should  be  entered  nunc  pro  tunc  affirming  the  decision  of  the  Board, 
and  confirming  the  claim  of  the  appellees  to  the  land  as  therein 
described. 

It  should,  perhaps,  be  observed  that  it  is  contended  by  the  counsel 
for  the  claimant  that  the  decree  entered  in  this  Court  does  not 
substantially  differ  from  that  of  the  Board.  It  is  enough  to  say 
that  the  description  of  the  land  is  entirely  different,  and  designates 
boundaries  not  mentioned  either  in  the  original  petition  of  the 
claimant,  or  in  any  of  the  documents  presented  by  her.  It  is  ap- 
parent that  the  land  confirmed  by  the  decree  of  this  Court  may  he 
different  from  that  confirmed  by  the  Board.  The  possible  existence 
of  such  a  discrepancy  would  seem  to  be  enough  to  warrant  the 
amendment  of  the  decree,  so  that  it  may  conform  to  the  decision 
intended  to  be,  as  expressed  in  the  decree  itself,  "  in  o^^  things 
affirmed." 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs,  JOEL  S.  POLACK 

et   ah,   CLATMING   THE   ISLAND    OP   YeRBA   BuENA. 

Whet.e  tlie  avcLwes  confain  no  e-vldence  or  trace  of  the  existence  of  a  grant,  the 
^Court  will  demand  the  fullest  and  moot  saL'sfactory  proofs  of  possession  and 
occupation  daring  the  existence  of  the  former  Government,  under  a  notorious 
and  undisputed  claim  of  title ;  and  clear  and  induhitable  evidence  of  the  gen- 
uineness of  the  grant  produced. 

Claim  for  the  Island  of  Yerba  Buena,  or  Goat  Island,  situated 
in  the  Bay  of  San  Francisco,  confi^-med  by  the  Board,  and  appealed 
by  the  UnHed  States. 

P.  Bella  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  and  William  Bland- 
ING,  for  Appellants. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  285 

United  States  v.  Polack  et  al. 

E.  L.  GooLD,  for  xippellees. 

The  title  of  the  claimants  is  derived  from  a  grant  alleged  to  have 
been  made  by  Governor  Alvarado,  Nov.  8th,  1838,  to  Juan  Jose 
Castro. 

The  authority  under  which  the  Governor  acted  is  a  dispatch  from 
the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  to  the  Governor  of  the  Californias, 
dated  July  20th,  1838,  directing  him  to  grant  the  islands  on  the 
coast  in  private  ownership. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  Governor's  authority  to  make  the 
grant.     The  only  dispute  is  as  to  its  genuineness. 

Neither  the  petition  of  Castro  nor  any  other  document  is  pro- 
duced from  the  archives.  So  far  as  appears,  the  records  of  the 
former  Government  do  not  contain  the  slightest  trace  of  the  alleged 
transaction.  Even  the  grant  itself  is  not  produced,  and  the  claim- 
ants rely  upon  an  alleged  copy  recorded  in  the  Recorder's  oflSce  of 
this  city  in  1849. 

To  prove  the  existence  and  genuineness  of  the  original,  the 
claimants  have  introduced  a  large  number  of  witnesses.  The 
United  States  have,  on  the  other  hand,  sought  to  show  that  the 
grant  was  made  by  Alvarado,  in  the  city  of  San  Francisco,  in  the 
year  1848,  and  antedated. 

Juan  Jose  Castro,  the  original  grantee,  testifies  that  he  presented 
a  petition  to  the  Governor  in  November,  1838,  at  Santa  Barbara, 
and  that  the  grant  was  issued  in  that  month ;  that  he  put  sheep, 
goats  and  hogs  upon  the  island,  and  retained  possession  of  it  until 
1848,  when  he  sold  it  to  Jones  for  |1,000,  which  was  paid  to  him 
in  the  presence  of  one  G.  H.  Nye  ;  that  Alvarado  and  Maria  C. 
Miranda  were  present  when  the  deed  was  made.  He  adds,  "  if 
the  grant  was  not  recorded  in  the  archives,  it  was  the  fault  of  the 
officers,  not  mine." 

The  witness  further  states,  that  at  the  time  of  the  sale  to  Jones, 
he  delivered  to  the  latter  the  original  petition  and  grant,  and  all  the 
papers  relating  to  the  title.  It  may  be  observed,  in  passing,  that  it 
is  strange  that  the  grantee  should  have  had  possession  of  the  origi- 
nal petition — a  document  which  was  usually  retained  by  the  Gov- 
ernment, and  constituted  a  part  of  the  expediente  on  file  in  the 


286  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Polack  et  al. 

archives.  It  is  also  strange  that  Jones,  when  he  dehvered  in  1849 
(not  1848,  as  stated  by  Castro)  his  papers  to  be  recorded,  should 
have  omitted  this  document,  so  important  to  show  the  regularity  of 
the  proceedings. 

Governor  Alvarado  testifies  in  positive  terms  that  he  made  the 
grant  in  1838.  That  the  copy  produced  is  a  substantial  copy  of 
the  grant  made  by  him,  and  that  he  was  present,  together  with  J. 
B.  R.  Cooper  and  his  wife,  when  Castro  executed  the  conveyance  to 
Jones. 

Joaquin  Castro,  brother  of  the  grantee,  deposes  that  he  saw  the 
grant  in  the  possession  of  the  grantee  in  1838  or  1839  ;  that  it  was 
on  commofi  paper ;  that  he  read  it,  and  that  the  paper  produced  is 
a  copy  of  it  substantially  ;  that  he  saw  his  brother  take  some  sheep 
in  a  boat  to  put  them  on  the  island,  and  that  he  saw  the  remains  of 
a  house  he  built  there  in  1843  or  1844. 

Jose  Castro  testifies  that  he  was  at  the  office  of  Gov.  Alvarado, 
in  Santa  Barbara,  in  1838,  where  he  accidentally  saw  lying  on  the 
table  a  grant  which  he  examined,  and  found  to  be  a  grant  of  the 
island  of  Yerba  Buena  to  Juan  Jose  Castro. 

Jesus  Maria  Castro  testifies,  that  in  the  year  1838  his  brother 
Juan  Jose,  the  grantee,  went  to  Santa  Barbara  to  see  Gov.  Alvara- 
do, and  when  he  came  back  he  brought  a  concession  for  the  island ; 
that  in  1839  he  saw  the  paper  in  his  mother's  hands ;  that  all  the 
papers  relating  to  their  rancho  were  in  a  little  box ;  that  on  looking 
them  over,  he  saw  amongst  them  the  title  to  Yerba  Buena.  .It  was 
signed  by  Gov.  Alvarado,  but  had  no  seal. 

The  witness  states  that  he  does  not  know  whether  his  brother  was 
in  possession  of  the  island  when  the  Americans  came ;  that  he  told 
him  (witness)  that  he  was  going  to  put  some  sheep  and  hogs  upon  it. 

Antonio  Ortega  testifies,  that  in  1840  he  asked  for  the  island  of 
Yerba  Buena,  that  Gov.  Alvarado  said  he  could  not  give  it  to  him. 
as  he  had  already  granted  it  to  Juan  Jose  Castro ;  that  afterwards 
in  1840,  he  with  one  Guerrero  were  in  the  house  of  a  man  named 
Hinckley  when  Juan  Jose  Castro  arrived  in  a  boat  from  San  Jose 
with  some  hogs  ;  that  Hinckley  asked  what  he  was  going  to  do  with 
them,  to  which  he  rephed  that  he  was  going  to  keep  them  on  the 
island ;  that  Hinckley  asked  if  he  would  sell  the  island ;  that  he 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  287 


UDiled  States  v.  Polack  et  al. 


said  "  Yes,  for  |3,000  ;"  that  he  heard  Castro  tell  many  persons  he 
had  a  title  to  the  island. 

Jose  Jesus  Pico  testifies  that  he  was  at  the  Mission  of  San  An- 
tonio in  1839  ;  that  Juan  Jose  Castro  came  from  below  and  stopped 
at  his  house  ;  that  this  was  in  July  or  August  of  1839  ;  that  while 
talking  together  of  lands  and  ranches,  Castro  showed  him  a  conces- 
sion of  the  island  of  Yerba  Buena  ;  that  he  read  it — it  had  no  seal, 
it  was  on  white  paper,  and  had  a  written  and  not  a  printed  heading, 
and  was  signed  by  Gov.  Alvarado. 

The  above  are  all  the  witnesses  who  testify  to  having  seen  the 
grant  before  the  date  of  the  sale  to  Jones,  Dec.  7th,  1848. 

Henriques,  who  was  the  clerk  to  whom  Jones,  in  1849,  delivered 
the  grant  and  conveyance  for  record,  testifies  that  he  took  particu- 
lar notice  of  the  paper ;  that  it  was  Mexican  paper  and  had  a  De- 
partmental stamp. 

Jesus  Maria  Castro  says  the  title  he  saw  had  no  seal. 

Pico  says  it  had  no  heading  or  habihtacion. 

Juan  Jose  Castro  says  the  copy  produced  is  "  an  accurate  copy ;" 
but  it  has  neither  heading  nor  seal. 

Joaquin  Castro  says  it  was  on  common  paper.  It  could  there- 
fore have  had  neither  heading  or  seal. 

Jose  Jesus  Pico  says  it  was  on  white  paper,  and  had  a  written 
and  not  a  printed  heading.  That  he  did  not  pay  any  attention  to 
any  other  part  than  the  Governor's  signature,  the  name  of  the 
island  and  the  heading  of  the  paper,  "  as  all  concessions  are  alike." 

And  finally,  Gov.  Alvarado  describes  it  as  being  issued  "  in  the 
usual  form." 

These  discrepenoies  are  certainly  calculated  to  suggest  a  doubt 
as  to  the  reliability  of  the  witnesses. 

That  this  concession  was  not  "  in  the  usual  form,"  or  like  all 
other  concessions,  is  obvious.  Its  language  and  form  are  peculiar. 
It  contains  no  conditions.  It  refers  to  the  superior  order  of  Aug. 
18th,  1838,  instead  of  the  laws  of  1824  and  the  regulations  of 
1828.  It  is  not  signed  by  the  Secretary.  It  contains  no  direction 
"  that  a  note  be  taken  in  the  corresponding  book."  It  has  no  seal, 
and  has  no  heading  or  habihtacion,  nor  any  note  of  the  fact  that 
common  paper  was  used  for  want  of  stamped  paper. 


288  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Polack  et  al. 

It  is  difficult  to  imagine  how  the  witnesses,  if  they  really  saw 
and  if  they  recollect  accurately  the  contents  of  the  paper,  could 
have  supposed  such  a  concession  to  be  like  all  others,  or  "■  in  the 
usual  form." 

It  is  not .  meant,  however,  that  there  is  anything  conclusive  in 
these  inaccuracies.  It  is  possible  that  they  may  have  seen  the 
title,  remembered  the  names  of  the  grantor,  the  grantee  and  the 
island,  and  have  failed  to  remember  precisely  whether  the  grant 
had  a  seal  or  a  heading.  It  is  only  when  they  undertake  to  speak 
positively  on  these  points,  and  are  found  to  be  inaccurate,  that  a 
doubt  as  to  their  good  faith  is  suggested. 

The  concession  is  dated  November  8th,  1838. 

Jesus  Maria  Castro  testifies,  as  has  been  stated,  that  in  1838  his 
brother  went  to  Santa  Barbara  to  see  Gov.  Alvarado,  and  when  he 
came  back  brought  a  concession  for  the  island  with  him. 

Gov.  Alvarado  swears  that  he  did  not  see  Castro  in  Santa  Bar- 
bara at  the  time  of  making  the  grant.  And  Jose  Jesus  Pico  says 
that  in  July  or  August  of  1839,  Castro  stopped  at  his  house  at  the 
Mission  of  San  Antonio,  on  his  way  back  from  Santa  Barbara,  when 
he  took  out  of  his  pocket,  or  out  of  the  "  traps  "  on  his  horse,  the 
concession  which  he  showed  to  the  witness.  The  witness  is  positive 
as  to  the  year  1839,  and  thinks  that  it  was  in  July  or  August. 

If  then,  as  Jesus  Maria  Castro  testifies,  the  grantee  went  to 
Santa  Barbara  to  procure  the  grant  in  1838,  and  of  course  before 
its  date,  Nov.  8th,  and  if  he,  on  his  return  from  Santa  Barbara  in 
July  or  August,  1839,  showed  it  to  Pico,  he  must  have  taken  eight 
or  nine  months  to  perform  the  journey. 

It  would  seem  that  so  long  an  absence  frOm  his  home  could 
hardly  have  been  forgotten  by  the  grantee  or  his  brothers ;  neither 
of  them,  however,  mention  this  protracted  absence,  and  Juan  Jos^ 
Castro  testifies  that  he  presented  a  petition  to  Gov.  Alvarado  at 
Santa  Barbara,  in  Nov.,  1838,  and  that  the  land  was  granted  at  the 
date  of  the  concession. 

On  the  part  of  the  United  States,  the  principal  witnesses  are  G. 
H.  Nye  and  J.  H.  Brown. 

Nye  testifies  that  he  saw  Alvarado  sign  a  paper  which  he  under- 
stood to  be  a  grant  of  the  island  of  Yerba  Buena.     That  this  was 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  289 


United  States  v.  Polack  et  al. 


done  at  the  bouse  of  John  Cooper,  commonly  called  "  Jack  the 
Soldier ;  "  that  Cooper,  Alvarado,  Castro,  Tolivia,  Jones  and  wit- 
ness were  present ;  that  he  met  Jones  on  the  way  to  Cooper's, 
whither  he  (witness)  was  going  to  get  a  saddle  ;  that  he  interpret- 
ed the  document  to  Jones ;  that  he  made  no  remark  about  its  bo- 
ing  antedated ;  that  To^Wia  was  asked  to  sign  as  a  witness,  but 
decHned,  saying  he  worM  not  put  his  name  to  a  false  document ; 
that  but  one  document  was  made  out  on  this  occasion  ;  that  he  was 
not  asked  to  sign  as  a  subscribing  witness. 

He  further  states,  that  after  the  conclusion  of  the  business,  Jones 
took  the  paper  and  went  away ;  that  when  passing  Leidesdorff  's 
house,  Jones  rubbed  his  hands  against  an  adobe  wall,  and  then 
rubbed  the  paper  between  them,  and  that  being  asked  the  reason, 
he  replied  that  it  was  to  give  the  paper  the  appearance  of  age ; 
that  he  accompanied  Jones  to  his  house,  and  soon  after  Alvarado, 
Jose  Castro  and  the  Alcalde  came  in  and  the  transfer  to  Jones  was 
made. 

This  witness  was  reexamined  in  open  Court,  after  the  case  was 
removed  on  appeal.  He  then  stated  that  the  paper  to  which  he 
referred  was  a  deed  from  Castro  to  Jones,  and  that  he  saw  but  one 
document,  and  that  it  was  signed  by  Castro  and  Alvarado.  Jones' 
name  was  mentioned  in  it.  The  witness  repeats  the  account  of 
Jones  rubbing  the  paper  with  his  hands  to  give  it  an  ancient  ap- 
pearance, and  adds  that  afterwards  Alvarado  and  Castro  met  at 
Jones'  house,  when  the  Alcalde  was  called  in,  and  the  paper  was 
signed  by  him.  That  the  paper  signed  by  the  Alcalde  was  the 
same  paper  he  had  seen  at  Cooper's  house. 

Juan  B.  R.  Cooper  and  Tolivia  have  both  been  called  as  witnesses 
by  the  claimants.  Whatever  the  nature  of  the  transaction  at 
Cooper's  house  was,  they  are  by  Nye  himself  stated  to  have  been 
present.  In  the  copy  of  the  deed  to  Jones,  the  name  of  Cooper 
and  that  of  his  wife,  Cecilia  Miranda,  appear  as  subscribing 
witnesses.  Cooper  den^'es  all  knowledge  of  the  ante-dated  grant. 
He  relates  the  circumstances  of  the  interview,  that  some  money 
was  paid,  and  that  he  and  his  wife  were  called  to  sign  a  paper  as 
witnesses ;  that  he  thinks  it  was  a  transfer  or  receipt  for  money. 

Tolivia  Fanfaran  testifies  that  he  was  present  at  the  sale  of  the 


290  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Polack  et  al. 

island  by  Castro  to  Jones ;  that  Gov.  Alvarado  drew  up  a  paper  for 
the  sale ;  that  he  was  not  asked  to  sign  as  a  witness,  nor  did  he 
decline  to  do  so,  as  stated  by  Nye,  and  that  the  whole  transaction, 
so  far  as  he  knew,  was  fair  and  honest. 

The  above  testimony,  with  that  of  Alvarado,  by  whom,  of  course, 
the  fabrication  of  the  grant  is  denied,  is  all  that  relates  to  the  trans- 
action at  Cooper's  house.  The  theory  of  the  United  States  rests 
on  the  testimony  of  Nye,  uncorroborated,  except  indirectly  by 
Brown,  as  will  presently  be  noticed. 

Captain  Nye's  testimony  is  by  no  means  reliable.  He  is  shown 
to  have  sustained  injury  by  a  fall  which  has  seriously  impaired  his 
faculties  ;  and  the  evidence  by  him  is  contradictory. 

That  a  paper  was  drawn  up  and  money  paid  by  Jones  at  Cooper's 
house,  is  admitted.  That  Castro,  Alvarado,  Cooper,  Nye,  Cecilia 
Miranda  and  ToHvia  were  present,  is  also  clear. 

The  deed  to  Jones,  a  copy  of  which  is  produced,  bears  the 
signatures  of  Cooper,  Nye,  Cecilia  Miranda  and  Alvarado.  Cooper 
and  Alvarado  both  swear  that  they  signed  as  witnesses  the  paper 
drawn  up  on  the  occasion  referred  to.  And  Nye  himself  says  there 
was  but  one  paper,  and  that  it  was  signed  by  Alvarado  and  Castro. 
If  this  be  so,  the  paper  must  have  been  the  deed  to  Jones,  and  not 
the  grant,  which  was  necessarily  signed  by  Alvarado  alone.  If 
Tolivia  was  asked  to  sign,  as  stated  by  Nye,  it  must  have  been  the 
deed  he  was  requested  to  witness,  and  not  the  grant.  To  ask  him 
to  witness  a  grant  by  the  Governor,  purporting  to  have  been  made 
ten  years  previously,  would  have  been  absurd.  The  only  hypothesis 
on  which  we  can  suppose  the  grant  to  have  been  fabricated,  as 
stated  by  Nye  in  his  first  deposition,  is,  that  both  the  grant  and  the 
deed  were  drawn  up  at  the  same  time.  But  Nye  is  positive  that 
only  one  paper  was  drawn  up,  and  this  in  his  second  deposition  he 
states  to  be  the  deed.  The  story  told  by  this  witness  is  so  confused, 
improbable  and  inconsistent,  and  it  is  contradicted  by  so  many  wit- 
nesses, that  it  is  impossible  for  the  Court  to  found  a  judgment  upon 
the  assumption  of  its  truth. 

J.  H.  Brown  testifies  that  he  kept  the  City  Hotel  in  this  city, 
and  while  behind  the  bar  heard  a  conversation  between  Alvarado 
and  Jones,  which  was  interpreted  by  Captain  Nye.     That  the 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  291 

United  States  v.  Polaek  et  al. 

former  agreed  to  make  a  title  to  Castro,  by  whom  a  deed  should  be 
given  to  Jones.  That  |2,000  was  at  first  demanded,  and  subse- 
quently 11,600  was  agreed  upon.  That  they  agreed  to  meet  at 
John  Cooper's  to  prepare  the  papers.  This  witness  describes  with 
much  particularity  the  place  where  the  parties  stood,  and  states 
that  he  attended  on  the  Court  compulsorily,  and  only  in  obedience  to 
the  subpoena  ;  that  he  never  had  heard  what  Nye  had  testified ; 
that  he  had  stated  the  circumstances  three  years  ago  to  one  Thomp- 
son, who  was  purchasing  an  interest  in  the  island. 

Captain  Nye,  who  was  recalled  after  the  deposition  of  Brown, 
emphatically  denies  ever  having  interpreted  between  Alvarado  and 
Jones,  as  stated  by  Brown,  as  does  also  Governor  Alvarado. 

To  corroborate  the  proofs  of  the  existence  of  the  grant  before 
1848,  the  claimants  have  called  W.  H.  Richardson,  who  swears 
that  in  1839  he  heard  that  Castro  had  a  grant  for  the  island ;  and 
Albert  Packard,  who  testifies  that  in  1847  he  made  a  translation 
of  a  grant  for  Yerba  Buena  to  one  of  the  Castros,  of  which  he 
believes  the  paper  produced  to  be  a  copy. 

Roland  Gelston  swears  that  in  1847  Jones  asked  him  his 
opinion  of  its  value,  and  stated  that  he  had  seen  a  grant  for  it  to 
Castro. 

Manuel  Torres  testifies  that  on  his  arrival  here  in  1843,  he 
asked  Juan  Jose  and  Joaquin  Castro  to  whom  the  island  belonged, 
and  that  Juan  Jose  said  it  was  his. 

William  Reynolds  states  that  he  was  on  the  island  in  1845, 
for  the  first  time  ;  that  he  there  met  with  one  Jack  Fuller  and 
Captain  Hinckley  ;  that  Fuller  said  that  the  goats  on  the  island 
belonged  to  him  and  one  Spear,  and  they  were  on  the  island  by 
permission  of  the  owner,  who  was  one  of  the  Castros ;  witness  does 
not  recollect  which. 

William  F.  Swazey,  Notary  Pubhc,  states  that  in  1846  he 
knew  Spear  intimately  ;  that  he  frequently  talked  of  the  goats  he 
had  on  the  island  ;  and  that  he  always  was  led  to  believe  from  his 
conversations  with  Spear,  Fuller  and  others  that  the  title  to  the 
island  was  in  one  of  the  Castros,  and  that  such  was  his  impression 
from  general  report. 

On  the  other  hand,  Samuel  Brannan,  who  came  to  San  Fran- 


292  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Polack  et  al. 

CISCO  in  184G,  Sherreback,  who  came  here  m  1841,  Buckelew, 
Leavenworth  and  Captain  Halleck  testify  that  they  never  heard  of 
the  grant  until  1848.  Leavenworth  was  Alcalde  up  to  August, 
1849,  and  from  his  position  may  be  supposed  to  have  had  some 
means  of  information. 

Sherreback  swears  that  on  his  first  arrival  in  1841  he  had  tb'^ee 
or  four  men-  cutting  wood  on  the  island  for  his  ship  ;  that  there  were 
no  houses  on  it  from  1841  to  1845  ;  that  he  never  heard  of  a  title 
to  the  island  until  August  or  September,  1848,  when  Jones  told 
him  he  had  purchased  it  from  Alvarado.  The  witness  is  positive 
that  Jones  said  he  purchased  it  from  Alvarado,  and  that  Castro's 
name  was  not  mentioned. 

He  also  states  that  he  has  seen  Alvarado  and  Jones  conversing 
together  at  his  house  several  times,  and  that  Nye  interpreted 
between  them — as  Jones  did  not  speak  one  word  of  Spanish. 

That  on  one  occasion  Jones,  Alvarado  and  Nye  came  out  of  the 
sitting-room  together  ;  that  Alvarado  and  Nye  went  away,  but 
Jones  stopped  to  pay  for  the  refreshments  they  had  had  ;  and  that 
Jones  then  stated  he  had  bought  the  island  from  Alvarado.  If  this 
account  be  true,  it  disproves  the  testimony  of  Nye  and  Alvarado, 
who  both  deny  ever  having  had  such  interviews. 

With  regard  to  Jones'  inabihty  to  speak  "  one  word  of  Spanish," 
Sherreback  is  contradicted  by  Colonel  Stevenson,  who  says  that 
Jones  spoke  Spanish  as  well  as  Americans  generally  do  ;  that  Jones 
was  an  educated  man,  etc. 

George  Patterson,  who  came  to  this  country  as  a  sailor  before 
the  mast,  and  now  keeps  a  bar  for  retailing  hquor,  says  that  he 
was  on  the  island  in  1840  ;  that  from  that  time  until  1848  he  has 
been  there  repeatedly  ;  that  he  saw  no  cattle  or  cultivation  of  any 
kind,  nor  heard  of  any  title  until  1848  ;  heard  that  Jones  had  a 
title,  but  never  heard  that  Castro  had ;  knows  that  Castro  had  a 
title  to  an  island  adjoining  the  Peralta  claim,  called  Brooks'  Island  ; 
that  Fuller  and  Spear  had  goats  on  Yerba  Buena  Island  ;  and  that 
in  1842  two  men  named  Cozzens  and  Smith  had  sheep  upon  it.  He 
never  saw  a  hog  upon  it. 

The  credibihty  of  this  witness  is  somewhat  impaired,  however, 
by  his  statements  on  cross  examination  respecting  his  intimacy  with 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  293 

Unilcd  Stages  v.  Polack  ct  al. 

Castro,  with  whom  he  was  evidently  unable  to  communicate,  as  he 
cannot  speak  Spanish  ;  by  his  denial  that  Dowling,  who  is  prin- 
cipally interested  in  defeating  this  claim,  ever  spoke  to  him  about 
the  testimony  he  was  to  give,  although  he  was  subpoenaed  by 
Dowling,  and  has  since  been  twice  at  his  house  ;  and  by  his  state- 
ment that  when  told  the  District  Attorney  wanted  to  see  him,  "  he 
could  not  imagine  what  it  was  for,"  &c.,  &c. 

Benjamin  R.  Buckelew  testifies  that  at  the  end  of  1848  or 
beginning  of  1849,  he  had  "  a  very  distinct  conversation  "  with 
Jones  respecting  the  island.  That  he,  witness,  expressed^  as  he 
had  previously  done,  his  doubts  whether  Jones  would  get  it  acknowl- 
edged by  the  United  States  ;  that  Jones  asked  his  reasons :  to 
which  he  replied,  that  Jones  and  himself  and  all  the  old  settlers 
knew  it  to  be  vacant  land  ;  that  Jones  rephed,  "  that  would  make 
no  difference,  as  he  had  the  title  so  fixed  and  fastened  that  the 
United  States  could  not  avoid  acknowledging  it."  The  witness  adds 
that  he  frequently  stated  to  Jones  that  if  any  one  had  a  right  to 
the  island  it  was  Fuller  and  Spear ;  that  they  were  in  possession  of 
it  when  he  and  Jones  came  to  the  country,  and  up  to  1848.  He 
further  states  that  up  to  1848,  there  were  no  buildings  on  the 
island. 

Captain  Halleck,  who  came  to  this  country  in  1847  as  an  ofiicer 
of  engineers,  testifies  that  it  became  his  duty  to  examine  into  and 
report  upon  the  titles  of  places  to  be  reserved  for  army  and  navy 
depots ;  that  after  inquiry,  he  found  no  title  or  claim  to  Yerba 
Buena  Island,  and  reported  it  as  vacant.  He  also  states,  that  in  a 
conversation  with  Jones  in  1850,  he  mentioned  to  him  the  reports 
that  the  title  was  made  in  this  town  in  1850,  and  antedated,  and 
that  he  subsequently  admitted  the  fact.  This  admission  was  made, 
however,  after  Jones  had  sold  the  island,  and  cannot  be  received  in 
evidence. 

The  witness  also  states,  on  his  cross  examination,  that  amongst 
those  of  whom  he  inquired  as  to  the  existence  of  a  title  to  the 
island,  was  W.  A.  Richardson  ;  and  that  from  no  source  did  he  learn 
that  any  existed,  nor  did  he  hear  of  any  until  the  end  of  1848  or 
beginning  of  1849.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  Richardson  swears 
that  Castro  built  a  house  on  the  island  ;  that  he  knew  of  the  grant 


294  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Polack  et  al. 

to  Castro  ;  and  that  he  had  Indians  on  it  whenever  he  saw  it — the 
last  time  being  in  1841.  A  report  made  by  Captain  Halle  ok  to 
Assistant  Adjutant  General  Turner  in  1847,  is  produced,  in 
which  Yerba  Buena  is  mentioned,  and  a  recommendation  made  that 
measures  be  taken  to  secure  a  title  to  it  and  other  mihtary  points 
mentioned. 

Yerba  Buena  is  certainly  not  in  this  report  stated  to  be  "  vacant 
public  land."  If  Capt.  Halleck  alludes  to  this  report  as  that 
wherein  he  reported  the  island  vacant,  he  is  evidently  mistaken. 
There  is  nothing  however  in  the  language  of  the  report,  or  the  sug- 
gestion that  a  title  should  be  secured  to  the  island,  which  is  neces- 
sarily inconsistent  with  the  idea  on  the  part  of  the  writer  that  the 
land  was  vacant. 

But  whatever  errors  the  witness  may  have  fallen  into  with  re- 
gard to  the  contents  of  his  reports,  it  is  almost  impossible  that  he 
should  be  mistaken  as  to  the  fact  which  he  states  so  positively,  that 
he  did  not  hear  of  any  title  to  the  island.  He  swears  that  Rich- 
ardson, then  Collector  of  the  port  under  the  Americans,  accom- 
panied him  and  Capt.  Warner  to  Angel  Island,  Alcatras  and  Point 
Caballos  ;  and  that  he  showed  them  where  to  land  on  Yerba  Buena 
Island.  As  the  object  of  these  visits  was  to  examine  the  sites,  and 
the  officers  were  directed  to  obtain  information  as  to  the  titles  of 
the  various  military  points,  it  is  impossible  that  they  should  not 
have  been  informed  by  Richardson  of  the  title  to  Yerba  Buena 
Island,  if  the  latter  had  then  heard  of  any ;  nor  is  it  conceivable 
that  if  informed  by  Richardson  of  Castro's  title,  Capt.  Halleck 
should  have  forgotten  it.  The  conflict,  therefore,  between  Capt. 
Halleck's  testimony  and  Richardson's  is  irreconcilable,  unless  we 
suppose  Richardson,  when  inquired  of  by  Halleck,  to  have  willfully 
and  without  an  object  stated  that  there  was  no  title,  knowing  all 
the  time  that,  as  he  has  since  sworn,  Castro  had  a  title,  and  had 
built  a  house  for  Indians  upon  it. 

Much  other  testimony  has  been  taken  in  this  case  which  I  do 
not  think  it  necessary  particularly  to  examine. 

On  reviewing  the  whole  testimony,  it  is  impossible  not  to  feel  that 
the  claim  set  up  is  liable  to  the  gravest  suspicion. 

The  only  witnesses  who  pretend  to  have  seen  the  grant  before 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  295 

United  States  v.  Polack  ct  al. 

the  American  occupation,  differ  from  each  other  on  all  points  except 
those  essential  to  be  established,  viz.,  the  names  of  the  grantor  and 
the  grantee  and  of  the  island.  The  existence  of  the  grant  seems 
to  have  been  known  to  but  a  very  small  number  of  people,  and  to 
have  been  unknown  to  persons  such  as  Buckelew,  Sherreback, 
Brannan  and  Leavenworth,  who  would  probably  have  heard  of  it. 

The  grant  itself  is  not  produced,  that  its  genuineness  might  be 
judged  of  on  inspection. 

No  trace  of  its  existence,  or  of  any  appHcation  for  it,  appears  in 
the  archives. 

There  has  been  no  occupation  of  the  land,  even  if  the  claimants' 
witnesses  are  behoved,  which  could  be  deemed  to  amount  to  a  pos- 
sessession  of  it,  or  even  to  the  assertion  of  a  claim  to  it. 

The  claimants'  own  witness,  Ortega,  testifies  that  in  1840  he  ap- 
plied for  a  grant  of  the  island,  which  Alvarado  refused.  Admitting 
this  to  be  true,  it  proves  that  Ortega  at  least  thought  it  vacant — an 
idea  incompatible  with  the  exercise  by  Castro  of  open  and  notorious 
proprietary  rights. 

If  the  only  question  in  the  case  was — "  Have  the  United  States 
proved  the  grant  to  have  been  fabricated  in  Cooper's  house  in 
1848,"  perhaps,  under  the  proofs,  the  answer  would  be  in  the 
negative. 

But  amidst  all  the  inconsistencies,  contradictions  and  retractions 
in  the  depositions  of  Capt.  Nye,  he  constantly  adheres  to  the  story 
of  Jones  rubbing  the  paper  to  give  it  an  appearance  of  age.  This 
story  he  repeats  in  his  second  deposition,  although  obviously  willing 
at  that  time  to  qualify  as  far  as  possible  his  former  testimony.  It 
is  told  with  a  circumstantiality  which  gives  to  it  the  air  of  a  narra- 
tive of  an  actual  occurrence.  The  mental  imbecihty  which  the 
claimants  have  been  at  pains  to  prove,  though  it  might  lead  him  to 
confound  one  paper  with  another,  would  hardly  allow  him  to  invent 
such  an  incident,  or  after  so  long  an  interval  to  repeat  the  invention 
with  so  much  accuracy. 

Brown,  too,  corroborates  his  story.  He  is  positive  and  clear, 
nor  has  his  character  been  impeached. 

That  Alvarado',  Castro,  Nye  and  Jones  were  present  at  the  hotel, 
though  positively  denied  by  Alvarado,  is  testified  to  by  Sherreback ; 


296  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Uniied  S'li  es  v.  Polack  et  al. 

and  the  suggestion  that  their  conversation  might  have  related  to  the 
mistaken  date  of  the  superior  order  under  which  Alvarado  acted, 
and  which  was  misunderstood,  or  has  been  misrepresented  by 
Brown,  admits  that  Alvarado  has  sworn  falselv  in  denying  that  such 
interviews  ever  took  place. 

It  seems  to  me  that  the  case  is  one  in  which  the  Court  should 
require,  before  pronouncing  in  favor  of  the  claim,  either  record 
evidence  from  the  archives  of  the  former  government,  or  at  least 
that  proof  of  the  genuineness  and  date  of  the  grant  afforded  by  a 
notorious  and  unequivocal  occupation  of  the  land  and  the  assertion 
of  a  right  of  ownership  to  it. 

It  is  not  pretended,  or  at  least  no  proof  whatever  has  been 
offered  to  show,  that  an  expediente  of  the  proceedings  with  reference 
to  the  grant  ever  existed.  The  petition  itself  was,  if  Castro  is  to 
be  beheved,  dehvered  first  to  him,  and  then  by  him  to  Jones.  It 
is  unaccountable  that  it  should  not  have  been  recorded  with  the 
other  papers. 

The  book  mentioned  in  Capt.  Folsom's  deposition  as  having  been 
burnt,  contained  merely  a  note  or  list  of  titles.  Ko  evidence  is 
offered  that  this  grant  was  among  the  number.  Had  a  note  been 
taken  of  it  in  the  "  corresponding  book,"  a  memorandum  to  that 
effect  would  in  all  probability  have  been  made  at  the  foot  of  the 
grant  by  the  Secretary,  as  was  usual.  But  this  grant  contains 
none  such,  nor  is  it  even  signed  by  the  Secretary. 

The  authority  under  which  the  Governor  acted  directed  him  to 
grant  "  de  acuerdo  "  with  the  Departmental  Assembly.  It  would 
seem,  therefore,  that  their  concurrence  or  approval  was  required  in 
this  as  in  ordinary  colonization  grants.  From  1838  to  1846,  while 
the  Assembly  was  in  session,  it  was  never  presented  to  that  body. 
The  only  explanation  offered  is  that  given  by  Alvarado,  viz. :  that 
the  Assembly  resolved  "  that  the  Governor  should  act  under  the 
order  without  further  advice  from  them."  No  resolution  to  this 
effect  is  produced.  The  fact  rests  on  the  bare  statement  of  Alvarado. 

As  against  the  Mexican  Government,  this  grant,  even  if  genuine, 
is  barren  of  all  equities.  The  object  of  the  superior  order  of  the 
twentieth  of  July,  1828,  was  to  protect  the  islands  on  the  coast 
from  settlement  by  foreign  adventurers,  and  from  becoming  a  resort 
for  smugglers. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  297 


United  States  v.  Polack  et  al. 


It  is  difficult  to  see  how  placing  a  few  sheep  and  hogs  upon  this 
island,  supposing  it  to  have  been  done,  cor^d  have  in  any  degree 
fulfilled  the  intentions  of  the  granting  power.  If  occupation  and 
settlement  were  required  in  any  case,  it  would  seem  that  in  a  grant 
made  under  the  motives  and  policy  which  dictated  this,  they  should 
surely  have  been  insisted  on. 

That  the  island  was  never  occupied  by  the  grantee  is,  I  think, 
established  beyond  reasonable  doubt.  Even  his  own  brother  is 
unable  to  state  whether  he  ever  took  possession  of  it.  From  1840 
to  1847  no  one  was  living  on  it.  Capt.  Nye  swears  that  he  has 
kno-^n  it  twenty-two  years,  and  that  in  1836  he  put  goats  upon  it. 
From  these  it  probably  derived  its  popular  name  of  "  Goat  Island." 
The  fact  of  Castro's  placing  hogs  and  sheep  upon  it,  if  he  in  tiath 
did  so,  can  neither  be  regarded  as  any  substantial  settlement  or  oc- 
cupation, nor  even  as  evidence  of  the  assertion  of  a  title  to  it  in 
himself. 

If  then  the  concurrence  of  the  Assembly  be  deemed  to  have 
been  necessary  to  fully  transfer  the  title  of  the  Mexican  nation  to 
the  grantee,  the  grant  unapproved  would  constitute  an  inchoate  or 
imperfect  title,  and  the  fulfillment  of  the  implied  conditions  and  the 
performance  of  the  acts  vv^h^ch  constituted  the  oaly  coosideiation 
for  it,  would  seem  necessary  to  perfect  die  equity  of  the  gi-antee 
and  entitle  him  to  demand  a  confirmation  at  the  hands  of  this  or 
the  former  government. 

But  this  objection  to  the  claim  it  is  unnecessary  further  to  con- 
sider, for  the  claim  must  be  rejected  on  other  grounds. 

In  the  recent  case  of  TJie  United  States  vs.  Camhuston,  it  is 
clearly  intimated  by  the  Svipreme  Court  that  in  cases  like  that 
under  consideration,  record  evidence  of  the  grant  should  be  pro- 
duced, or  its  absence  satisfactorily  accounted  for.  Neither  has  been 
done  in  this  case. 

The  case  presented  is  not  that  of  a  Califbi^nian,  found  at  the  ac- 
quisition of  the  country  living  on  his  rancho,  under  a  claim  of  title 
notorious  and  undisputed,  and  who  merely  asks  the  United  States 
to  recognize  his  rights. 

On  the  contrary,  the  application  is  for  a  title  from  the  United 
States  to  parties  who  have  never  inhabited,  occupied  or  cultivated 
any  portion  of  the  land  solicited. 


298  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Thurn  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

Engaged  as  this  Court  has  been  for  several  years  in  the  investi- 
gation of  these  cases,  it  is  idle  to  disguise  the  fact  already  notorious 
in  the  country  and  so  often  painfully  apparent  to  the  Court,  that 
the  parol  testimony  by  which  these  claims  have  been  sought  to  be 
established,  is  in  many  instances  utterly  unreliable. 

The  best  if  not  the  only  tests  of  the  genuineness  of  an  alleged 
grant  are  to  be  found  in  the  record  evidence  contained  in  the 
archives,  and  in  the  fact  that  the  land  has  been  occupied  under  a 
notorious  claim  of  title  recognized  by  the  former  government. 

Under  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  case  of  Fremont, 
the  latter  of  these  tests  cannot  in  general  be  applied ;  for  the  non- 
occupation  can  usually  be  excused  or  accounted  for  by  parol  proofs. 

The  later  case  of  Henry  Cambuston  seems  to  indicate  that  the 
Supreme  Court  are  resolved  to  apply  the  former  test  with  rigor. 

But  at  least  it  may  be  asserted  with  confidence,  that  where  there 
is  no  trace  of  the  grant  in  the  archives,  no  possession  or  unequivocal 
claim  of  ownership  during  the  continuance  of  the  former  govern- 
ment, and  the  grant  itself  is  not  produced,  the  Court  should  de- 
mand the  clearest  and  most  indubitable  proofs  of  the  genuineness  of 
the  title. 

If  such  be  not  offered,  and  if  the  testimony  as  in  this  case  be  con- 
flicting and  unsatisfactory,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Court  to  pronounce 
the  claim  not  proved.   • 

Such,  after  the  most  careful  consideration,  I  feel  to  be  my  duty 
in  the  case  at  bar. 


CIPRIANO  THURN  et  al,  claiming  part  of  the  Rancho 
Canada  del  Corte  Madera,  Appellants,  vs.  THE  UNITED 
STATES. 

Where  one  of  two  persons  to  whom  a  grant  was  made  has  exhibited  a  deed  from 
his  cograntee,  and  obtained  a  confirmation  of  his  claim  to  the  wliole  tract, 
the  cograntee  who  has  presented  his  separate  claim  for  his  half,  and  who  denies 
the  execution  of  the  deed,  is  entitled  to  a  confirmation  as  against  the  United 
States,  and  the  rights  of  the  parties  inter  sese  will  be  left  to  be  determined  by 
the  ordinary  tribunals. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  299 


Thum  et  al.  v.  United  States. 


Claim  for  one-half  of  a  square  league  of  land  in  Santa  Clara 
county,  rejected  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimants. 

E.  R.  Carpentier,  for  Appellants. 

P.  Dblla  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

In  this  case  the  genuineness  of  the  grant,  the  regularity  of  the 
proceedings,  and  the  fulfillment  by  the  grantees  of  all  the  conditions 
are  estabhshed  by  abundant  proofs,  and  admitted  on  the  part  of  the 
United  States. 

The  proceedings,  up  to  the  issuance  of  a  final  title  and  including 
an  approval  of  the  grant  by  the  Departmental  Assembly,  were  con- 
ducted in  strict  confornaity  to  the  Regulations  of  1828  ;  and  on 
the  eleventh  of  June,  1884,  the  final  documento  required  by  those 
regulations  was  issued  to  the  applicants,  Maximo  Martinez  and 
Domingo  Peralta. 

The  present  claim  is  by  the  representatives  of  the  latter,  and  is 
for  one-half  of  the  rancho.  Maximo  Martinez  has  also  presented 
his  claim,  which,  however,  embraced  the  whole  rancho.  To  estab- 
lish his  title  to  the  share  of  his  cograntee,  he  gave  in  evidence  an 
alleged  conveyance,  dated  May  19th,  1834,  from  Peralta  to  him- 
self. As  this  conveyance  seemed  prima  facie  to  show  the  whole 
title  to  be  in  Martinez,  the  claim  to  the  whole  was  confirmed  to  him 
by  the  Board  and  by  this  Court.  Domingo  Peralta  now  presents 
his  claim,  and  would  clearly  be  entitled  to  a  confirmation  of  one- 
half  of  the  land,  had  not  the  United  States  put  in  evidence  the 
conveyance  alleged  to  have  been  made  by  him  to  Martinez  as 
above  stated. 

Many  objections  to  this  document  were  urged  on  the  part  of  the 
claimant ;  both  its  genuineness  and  supposed  legal  efiect  were 
strenuously  denied. 

The  District  Attorney  declined  to  argue  the  questions  discussed 
by  claimants,  observing  that  the  controversy  was  one  in  which  the 
United  States  had  not  the  slightest  interest ;  the  grant  was  unques- 
tionably valid,  and  the  land  had  already  been  confirmed  to  Martinez, 
the  appeal  in  whose  case  had  been  dismissed  by  order  of  the 
Attorney  General.  He  further  observed,  that  no  decision  of  this 
20 


300  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Thurn  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

Court  could  in  any  way  determine  private  rights  in  the  parties  to 
land  admitted  not  to  belong  to  the  United  States,  and  to  which  the 
full  legal  and  equitable  title  was  already  vested  in  private  indi- 
viduals. 

The  District  Attorney  was  understood  to  say  that  he  interposed 
no  objection  to  a  confirmation  to  the  present  claimant,  if  the  Court 
was  of  opinion  that  such  a  decree  should  be  entered. 

It  has  heretofore  been  decided  by  the  Board  and  this  Court  that 
third  persons  have  no  right  to  intervene  in  these  proceedings  to 
ascertain  whether  land  claimed  under  titles  derived  from  the 
former  Government  is  public  or  private  land.  As  the  decree  of 
this  Court  and  the  patent  issued  under  it  cannot  affect  the  rights 
of  any  parties,  except  the  United  States  and  the  claimants,  it 
seemed  manifestly  improper  to  allow  an  inquiry,  instituted  to  ascer- 
tain the  rights  of  the  United  States,  and  to  determine  what  was 
private  and  what  pubHc  land,  to  be  controverted  into  a  complicated 
series  of  cross  ejectments  between  various  private  claimants,  and 
this,  where  the  decision  of  the  Court  could  not  in  any  event  decide 
the  rights  litigated  before  it. 

The  only  course,  therefore,  to  be  adopted  was  to  confirm  to  the 
claimant  whenever  he,  by  a  deraignment  of  title  primd  facie 
regular,  showed  himself  to  be  the  owner  of  a  valid  grant. 

This  mode  of  proceeding  involved,  it  is  true,  the  apparent  anom- 
aly of  confirming  in  some  cases  the  same  land  to  different  persons 
claiming  under  the  same  original  grant.  But  as  each  suit  was 
separate,  and  as  the  Court  could  not  enter  into  question  of  adverse 
private  rights,  this  anomaly  was  not  to  be  avoided. 

Had  the  present  claimant  been  permitted  to  intervene  in  the  case 
of  Martinez,  he  perhaps  might  have  shown,  as  he  claims  to  have 
done  in  this  case,  that  the  alleged  conveyance  to  Martinez  was  fab- 
ricated or  inoperative.  As  he  was  not  permitted  to  do  so,  it  seems 
equally  improper  to  allow  that  conveyance  to  be  introduced  into 
this  case,  nominally  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  but  really  on 
the  part  of  Martinez,  to  defeat  the  claim  of  Peralta  to  a  confirma- 
tion, which  if  it  were  not  for  that  conveyance  he  would  be  clearly 
entitled  to. 

Besides,  if  the  validity  of  that  conveyance  is  to  be  passed  upon 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  301 


Marsh  v.  United  States. 


by  this  Court,  Martinez  should  be  heard,  and  allowed  to  introduce 
testimony.  The  District  Attorney  has  neither  any  interest  or 
power  to  represent  him.  To  the  United  States  it  is  indifferent 
whether  the  land  belongs  to  both  the  original  grantees,  or  to  Mar- 
tinez alone. 

To  refuse  to  confirm  this  claim,  is  a  recognition  of  the  validity  of 
a  conveyance  which  may  be  liable  to  grave  objections.  But  to 
confirm  the  claim,  is  merely  to  give  to  the  claimant  a  right  to  a 
deed  from  the  United  States,  reUnquishing  and  quit-claiming  any 
supposed  title  they  might  have  been  deemed  to  possess,  and  the  re- 
ception of  which  merely  puts  the  claimant  on  an  equal  footing  with 
his  adversary,  and  enables  both  to  contest  with  equal  evidence  of 
title  from  the  United  States  their  adverse  rights  before  the  ordinary 
tribunals. 

I  think  that  the  only  course  to  be  adopted  is  to  confirm  this 
claim,  and  to  leave  the  question  of  ownership  inter  partes  to  be 
litigated  before  the  tribunals  having  jurisdiction  over  the  subject 
matter  of  the  controversy. 

A  decree  must  be  entered  accordingly. 


ALICE  MARSH,  CLAiMiNa  the  Rancho  Los  Meganos,  Appel- 
lant, vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

The  limitation  of  quantity  in  the  fourth  condition  of  the  grant  must  govern,  and 
the  claimant  confirmed  to  the  precise  quantity  of  three  square  leagues. 

Claim  for  twelve  leagues  of  land  in  Contra  Costa  county,  rejected 
by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimant. 

Horace  Hawes,  for  Appellant. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  is  for  a  tract  of  land  called  "  Los  Me- 
ganos," granted  to  Jos^  Noriega,  October  13th,  1835,  and  approved 


302  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Marsh  v.  United  States. 

by  the  Territorial  Deputation,  October  loth,  1835.     The  final  doc- 
umento  and  titulo  issued  December  2d,  of  the  same  year. 

The  original  grant  was  not  produced  to  the  Board,  nor  was  any 
satisfactory  evidence  of  its  contents  given. 

The  expediente,  however,  containing  the  petition,  informes  and 
decree  of  concession,  was  found  duly  archived,  and  on  these  docu- 
ments, together  with  parol  proof  that  the  titulo  had  in  fact  issued, 
the  claimant  relied  for  confirmation. 

In  his  petition,  Noriega  set  out  the  boundaries  of  the  land  sohc- 
ited  with  some  particularity,  and  states  its  extent  to  be  four  leagues 
from  south  to  north,  and  three  from  east  to  west.  Inasmuch  as  the 
decree  of  concession  and  the  approval  of  the  Deputation  showed 
that  the  land  of  "  Los  Meganos "  had  been  granted,  it  was  con- 
tended that  the  lost  titulo  must  have  embraced  the  land  solicited 
in  the  petition.  It  was  not,  however,  urged  that  all  the  land  em- 
braced within  the  boundaries  had  been  granted,  and  the  claim  was 
confined  to  a  tract  of  twelve  square  leagues  which  had  been,  at  the 
instance  of  the  claimant,  surveyed  by  the  Surveyor  General.  By 
this  survey,  the  last  line  which  enclosed  the  Rancho  had  been  so 
run  as  to  include  the  precise  quantity  of  twelve  leagues.  Had  the 
Surveyor's  lines  been  extended  so  as  to  embrace  the  entire  tract 
according  to  the  principles  on  which  the  survey  was  founded,  the 
land  would  have  been  found  to  be  about  fifteen  square  leagues  in 
extent.  A  survey,  according  to  the  description  contained  in  the 
petition,  would,  it  is  observed  by  Mr.  Commissioner  Felch,  embrace 
some  twenty  or  twenty-five  square  leagues  of  land. 

Since  the  cause  has  been  pending  on  appeal,  the  original  record 
of  the  titulo  has  been  produced  from  the  archives,  where  it  is  set 
out  at  length. 

The  fourth  condition  states  the  extent  of  the  granted  land  to  be 
a  little  more  than  three  square  leagues,  and  it  contains  the  usual 
direction  for  a  judicial  measurement  and  a  reservation  of  the 
sobrante. 

It  is  urged  that  this  limitation  should  be  disregarded  as  being 
repugnant  to  the  obvious  intention  of  the  grantor,  and  probably  in- 
troduced by  mistake. 

It  is  pot,  perhaps,  very  clear  what  the  claimant  supposes  herself 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  303 

Marsh  v.  United  States. 

entitled  to.  Whether  she  contends  that  the  grant  should  be  treated 
as  a  grant  by  raistes  and  bounds,  and  the  whole  tract  embraced 
within  the  boundaries  mentioned  in  the  petition  should  be  confirmed 
to  her,  to  the  extent  of  twenty  or  twenty-five  leagues,  or  whether, 
as  it  appears  to  have  been  admitted  before  the  Board,  she  should 
be  restricted  to  the  quantity  of  twelve  leagues,  according  to  the 
survey  procured  to  be  made. 

It  is  presumed,  however,  that  independently  of  the  limitation 
contained  in  the  fourth  condition,  it  would  not  be  contended  that 
the  Governor  could  have  intended  to  grant  a  tract  of  twenty  or 
twenty-five  leagues  in  extent,  when  the  petitioner  himself  stated  it 
to  contain  only  twelve  leagues,  and  two  of  the  witnesses  a  much 
smaller  quantity ;  and  such  seems  to  have  been  the  view  taken  of 
the  grant  by  the  counsel  for  the  claimant. 

The  grant  cannot,  therefore,  be  treated  as  a  grant  by  metes  and 
bounds,  and  the  only  question  is,  which  of  the  specifications  of 
quantity  shall  govern — that  contained  in  the  petition,  or  that  con- 
tained in  the  grant  ? 

It  is  urged  that  the  Governor  by  his  decree  of  concession,  and 
the  Deputation  by  confirming  the  title  to  "  Los  Meganos,"  clearly 
indicated  their  intention  to  grant  the  tract  as  described  in  the  pe- 
tition, and  of  the  extent  therein  mentioned. 

Had  the  boundaries  of  this  tract  been  found  to  embrace  only  the 
quantity  stated  in  the  petition  ;  had  the  attention  of  the  Governor 
been  particularly  directed  to  the  question  of  its  extent ;  had  he 
been  apprised  of  its  extent  by  the  testimony  of  witnesses,  and  with 
these  facts  before  him,  repeated  in  his  concession,  and  in  the  title, 
the  boundaries  as  set  forth  in  the  petition  ;  and  had  the  Deputation 
confirmed  with  express  reference  to  those  boundaries,  we  might 
have  supposed,  as  in  the  case  of  Rosa  Pacheco,  that  the  limitation 
in  the  condition  was  the  result  of  a  clerical  error — provided  that  in 
attributing  to  the  Governor  the  intention  to  grant  by  metes  and 
bounds,  we  did  not  suppose  him  to  have  exceeded  the  quantity  of 
eleven  leagues  to  which  his  granting  power  was  limited. 

But  in  this  case  the  proceedings  show,  that  in  all  probability  the 
limitation  in  the  condition  accurately  expressed  the  intention  of  the 
Governor  and  of  the  Assembly. 


304  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Marsh  v.  United  States. 

The  petition  was  referred  to  the  Alcalde  of  the  Capital  to  take 
information,  by  the  oaths  of  three  competent  witnesses,  as  to  the 
qualifications,  etc.,  of  the  petitioner,  and  the  extent  and  character 
of  the  land. 

One  of  them  states  that  the  tract  petitioned  for  may  be  three 
leagues  long,  and  in  width  from  two  leagues  to  less  than  one-half 
a  league. 

The  second  witness  states  its  extent  to  be  about  two  and  one-half 
or  three  leagues  in  length,  and  from  one-half  to  two  leagues  in 
width. 

The  third  witness  states  it  to  be  four  or  five  leagues  in  length, 
and  three  in  breadth. 

It  thus  appears  that  by  the  evidence  of  two  out  of  three  witnesses 
the  Governor  and  the  Deputation  were  apprised  that  the  extent  of 
the  land  of  "  Los  Meganos  "  was  about  three  leagues.  When,  there- 
fore, they  granted  the  land  by  that  name,  it  is  at  least  as  prob- 
able that  they  intended  a  tract  of  the  extent  sworn  to  by  the  two 
witnesses,  as  of  the  larger  extent  sworn  to  by  the  third  or  as  repre- 
sented by  the  petition.  The  limitation  in  the  condition  of  the  grant 
removes  all  doubt  upon  the  subject,  and  unequivocally  expresses 
the  intention  which,  without  it,  we  might  well  have  attributed  to 
the  grantor. 

The  claim  to  twelve  leagues  rests  entirely  upon  the  supposition 
that  the  Governor  intended,  by  the  term  "  Los  Meganos,"  a  tract 
of  the  extent  represented  by  the  petitioner.  But  when  we  find 
him  informed  by  the  depositions  of  two  witnesses  that  the  land  of 
that  name  only  included  about  three  leagues,  there  is  surely  as 
much  reason  to  suppose  that  he  meant  a  tract  of  the  smaller  extent 
as  of  the  larger. 

There  is  therefore  nothing  repugnant  to  the  apparent  intention 
of  the  Governor  or  the  Deputation  in  the  introduction  of  the  lim- 
itation of  quantity  in  the  fourth  condition.  Nor  can  I  perceive  on 
what  grounds  the  Court  would  be  authorized  to  strike  from  the 
grant  so  important  a  part  of  it. 

As  the  grant  can  in  no  case  be  deemed  a  grant  by  metes  and 
bounds,  the  words  "  a  httle  more  than,"  which  precede  the  words 
"•  three  leagues,"  are  not  susceptible  of  any  definite  construction. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  305 

Redman  ct  al.  v.  United  States. 

They  were  probably  inserted  as  an  authority  to  the  judicial  officer, 
slightly  to  increase  the  quantity  for  convenience  of  boundary,  or 
similar  reasons.  As  no  such  discretion  can  be  confided  to  the 
Surveyor  General,  those  words  must  be  rejected  for  uncertainty, 
and  the  claimant  confirmed  to  the  precise  quantity  of  three  square 
leagues,  to  be  located  within  the  boundaries  described  in  the  peti- 
tion, in  the  form  and  divisions  prescribed  by  law  for  surveys  in  Cal- 
ifornia, and  embracing  the  entire  grant  in  one  tract. 


J.  W.  REDMAN  et  al.^  claiming  part  of  the  Orchard  of 
Santa  Clara,  Appellants,  vs,  THE  UNITED  STATES, 

The  claim  must  be  rejected,  on  the  ground  that  the  bona  Jides  of  the  grant  have 
not  been  suflSlciently  established  by  the  evidence. 

Claim  for  about  ten  acres  of  land  in  Santa  Clara  county,  re- 
jected by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimants. 

Thornton  &  Williams,  for  Appellants. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claimants  have  produced  in  evidence  a  grant  purporting  to 
have  been  made  by  Pio  Pico,  on  the  thirtieth  of  June,  1846,  con- 
veying the  Orchard  of  Santa  Clara  to  Castaneda,  Arenas  and  Dias, 
in  consideration  of  $1200  paid  by  them  to  the  Government. 

Also,  a  memorandum  or  account,  purporting  to  have  been  signed 
by  Pico,  of  the  articles  furnished  to  the  Government  by  the  Seiiores 
Castaneda,  Arenas  and  Dias,  in  payment  of  the  purchase  money  of 
the  Gardens  of  Santa  Clara  and  San  Jos^.  This  receipt  or  ac- 
count is  dated  Los  Angeles,  July  2d,  1846. 

The  grant  purports  to  be  signed  by  Pio  Pico,  as  Governor,  and 
by  Jose  Matias  Moreno,  as  Secretary.  Appended  to  it  is  the 
usual  certificate,  signed  by  Moreno,  stating  that  "  a  note  of  this  su- 
perior decree  has  been  taken  in  the  corresponding  book." 


306  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Eeclman  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

No  expediente  from  the  archives  has  been  produced,  nor  do 
those  records  contain  any  trace  whatever  of  the  execution  of  this 
grant.  No  corresponding  book  has  been  exhibited,  nor  is  any  such 
found  among  the  archives. 

No  possession  of  the  land  was  taken  by  the  grantees  during  the 
existence  of  the  former  government.  It  is  stated  by  Jas.  Alex- 
ander Forbes  that  the  orchard  remained  in  the  possession  of  the 
missionary  priests  up  to  the  year  1849  or  1850.  About  that  time, 
one  Osio  obtained  the  possession,  but  by  what  right  or  title  does 
not  appear. 

The  claim  thus  rests  entirely  on  the  alleged  grant  produced  by 
the  parties,  with  the  usual  proof  of  signatures,  and  on  the  parol  tes- 
timony offered  by  them. 

It  is  contended  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  that  the  grant 
was  made  subsequently  to  the  conquest  of  the  country,  and  is  ante- 
dated. 

The  grant,  as  we  have  seen,  purports  to  have  been  made  at  Los 
Angeles,  on  the  thirtieth  of  June,  1846. 

It  was  proved  before  the  Board  that  at  that  date  Pio  Pico  was 
not  at  Los  Angeles,  but  at  Santa  Barbara,  with  his  secretary  and 
suite.  The  claimants  have  taken,  however,  in  this  Court,  the  de- 
position of  Cayetano  Arenas,  who  testifies  that  the  grant  was  made 
in  Santa  Barbara,  and  sent  by  the  Governor  to  the  witness  at  Los 
Angeles,  where  it  was  received  by  him  July  4th,  1846  ;  and  it  is 
suggested  that  the  grant  was  dated  at  Los  Angeles,  the  Capital  of 
the  Department,  though  actually  signed  at  Santa  Barbara,  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  practice  of  the  Governor.  The  explanation  is 
plausible,  though  it  has  somewhat  the  air  of  an  afterthought  to 
meet  a  difficulty  that  had  unexpectedly  arisen. 

It  is  strange,  however,  that  the  receipt  above  referred  to  should 
particularly  set  forth  that  "  it  was  given,  for  the  security  of  those 
interested,  in  the  city  of  Los  Angeles  on  the  second  of  July^  1846," 
when  in  fact,  if  executed  at  all  on  that  date,  it  must  have  been  ex- 
ecuted in  Santa  Barbara,  or  on  the  Governor's  own  rancho. 

The  grant,  as  has  been  stated,  is  to  Juan  Castaiieda,  Luis  Arenas 
and  Benito  Dias.  Castaiieda  is  dead.  The  other  two  have  been 
examined  as  witnesses. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  307 

Kedman  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

It  is  clearly  proven,  and  indeed  admitted  by  Cayetano  Arenas, 
that  the  grant  is  in  the  handwriting  of  Castefiada. 

It  is  also  in  proof  that  during  the  whole  month  of  June,  and 
during  the  first  days  of  July,  1846,  Castafieda  was  at  the  head- 
quarters of  General  Castro  at  Santa  Clara.  That  about  the  tenth 
of  July  he  was  on  the  road  to  Los  Angeles,  at  which  place  he  ar- 
rived about  the  end  of  July. 

These  facts  are  established  by  the  testimony  of  General  Castro 
himself,  by  that  of  Benito  Dias,  and  of  Cayetano  and  Luis  Arenas. 
Dias  states  that  he  left  Monterey  for  Los  Angeles  on  the  tenth  or 
twelfth  of  July.  That  on  his  way  down  he  met  Castaneda  with 
General  Castro ;  that  they  proceeded  together  to  Los  Angeles, 
where  they  arrived  about  July  20th.  That  they  savf  Pio  Pico  on 
their  journey,  at  his  Rancho  of  San  Marguerita. 

Cayetano  Arenas,  the  claimants'  witness,  states  that  at  the  time 
he  received  the  grant  from  Pio  Pico,  viz.,  July  4th,  Castaneda, 
Benito  Dias  and  Luis  Arenas,  the  father  of  the  witness,  were  not  in 
Los  Angeles,  but  were  in  the  upper  country ;  but  that  the  latter 
arrived  a  few  days  afterwards. 

Luis  Arenas  testifies  that  he  first  saw  the  grant  in  the  hands  of 
Castefiada  in  his  (Arenas')  house,  in  Los  Angeles ;  that  he  left 
San  Jose  for  Los  Angeles  the  day  after  he  heard  of  the  taking  of 
Sonoma  by  the  Americans.  This  event  occurred  in  the  middle  of 
June.  Supposing,  then,  the  witness'  memory  to  be  accurate,  he 
must  have  lingered  on  the  road,  if  his  son  is  to  be  believed,  a  con- 
siderable time,  for  Cayetano  Arenas  swears,  as  we  have  seen,  that 
he  received  the  grant  in  Los  Angeles  on  the  fourth  of  July,  and 
his  father  did  not  arrive  until  some  days  afterwards. 

Luis  Arenas  further  states  that  he  "  met  Castaneda  in  Los  An- 
geles a  Uttle  while  after  his  arrival."  We  have  already  seen,  how- 
ever, that  Castaneda  did  not  arrive  in  Los  Angeles  until  about  the 
twentieth  of  July.  And  Luis  Arenas  admits  that  when  Castaneda 
showed  him  the  grant,  Benito  Dias  and  Governor  Pico  were  in  the 
place,  and  that  he  saw  them  every  day. 

Bearing  these  facts  in  mind,  we  proceed  to  consider  the  testi- 
mony of  Dias  with  respect  to  the  execution  of  the  grant.  This 
witness  swears  that  the  grant  was  executed  in  Los  Angeles  about 


308  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Redman  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

the  first  of  August ;  that  he  saw  Castaneda  write  it,  and  that  on 
the  same  day  he  brought  it  back  to  the  house  of  Luis  Arenas  with 
the  Governor's  signature  attached  to  it ;  that  the  receipt  for  money 
and  articles  furnished  was  written  a  few  days  after,  but  that  he 
(the  witness)  never  paid  anything  on  account  of  purchase. 

If  this  testimony  be  true,  there  is  an  end  of  the  case. 

The  fact  that  the  grant  is  in  the  handwriting  of  Castaneda,  would 
seem  of  itself  such  a  corroboration  of  Dias'  testimony  as  to  exclude 
much  doubt  as  to  its  truth.  Arenas  himself  does  not  pretend  to 
have  heard  of  the  grant,  or  the  agreement  for  the  sale  of  the  or- 
chard, until  after  Castenada's  arrival  in  Los  Angeles ;  and  this 
notwithstanding  that,  if  the  receipt  be  genuine,  he,  Castaneda,  and 
Dias,  had  on  the  second  of  July,  furnished  to  the  Governor  cash 
and  various  supplies  to  the  amount  of  $3200.  He  further  states 
that  he  gave  the  Governor  two  hundred  head  of  cattle,  that  he  re- 
ceived back  three  hundred  dollars  in  change,  and  that  he  delivered 
to  Pico  a  writing  which  showed  that  he  made  his  part  of  the  pay- 
ment with  the  two  hundred  head  of  cattle,  which  were  then  on  Pio 
Pico's  rancho.  He  adds  that  Pio  Pico  has  these  same  cattle  to 
this  day. 

Benito  Dias  states  that  he  knows  of  the  payment  for  the  orchard 
of  Santa  Clara  only  from  what  Castaneda  told  him,  viz.,  that  he 
(Castaneda)  had  given  a  note  to  Pico,  payable  v/hen  the  Mexican 
authority  should  be  reestabhshed,  but  that  he,  Dias,  never  paid 
any  part  of  it. 

The  fact  that  the  grant  is  in  the  handwriting  of  Castaneda  might, 
perhaps,  be  accounted  for,  consistently  with  the  good  faith  of  the 
transaction,  on  the  hypothesis,  which  however  would  be  purely  con- 
jectural, that  Castaneda  had  written  it  out  and  sent  it  to  the  Gov- 
ernor. But  in  such  case  he  must  have  written  it  before  it  was 
signed,  and  how  can  we  explain  the  circumstance  that  the  date 
June  30th,  1846)  is  in  the  same  handwriting  and  evidently  written 
at  the  same  time  with  the  rest  of  the  document  ? 

But  supposing  this  difficulty  surmounted,  the  receipt  is  evidently 
antedated,  or  a  fabrication.  Arenas  could  not  have  assigned  the 
cattle  spoken  of  by  him,  and  the  receipt  for  which  is  acknowledged 
on  the  second  of  July,  at  Los  Angeles.     He  did  not  arrive  until  a 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  309 

Redman  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

few  days  before  Castafieda  ;  and  his  son,  the  only  important  witness 
for  the  claimants,  states  that  he  arrived  some  days  after  the  fourth 
of  July. 

Castafieda  could  not  have  paid  the  cash,  or  delivered  the  other 
articles  mentioned  in  the  receipt,  on  the  second  of  July,  for  at  that 
time  he  was  at  the  headquarters  of  General  Castro,  at  a  distance  of 
several  hundred  miles ;  and  yet  the  receipt  is  in  his  handwriting. 

The  account  given  by  Dias  seems  the  only  mode  of  reconciling 
these  discrepalicies,  and,  though  I  should  hesitate  to  accept  his  un- 
supported statement,  whether  for  or  against  a  claimant  in  cases  of 
this  class,  in  this  instance  it  is  so  corroborated  and  confirmed  by 
other  testimony,  as  to  justify  a  belief  in  its  truth. 

Cayetano  Arenas  is  the  only  witness  on  the  part  of  the  claimants 
who  pretends  to  have  seen  the  grant  before  the  end  of  July. 

If  the  claim  is  to  be  confirmed,  it  must  be  on  his  unsupported 
testimony. 

The  account  given  by  him  bears  strong  marks  of  improbability. 
He  states  that  the  grant  was  sent  to  him,  "  as  it  related  to  his 
father's  business,"  and  that  he  was  instructed  to  retain  it  until  Cas- 
taiieda  came  down  from  the  upper  country.  His  father  arrived  a 
few  days  after,  but  Castaiieda  did  not  arrive,  as  we  have  seen, 
until  about  the  twentieth.  The  father  of  the  witness  was  one  of 
the  original  grantees.  It  is  strange  that  he  should  not  only  have 
withheld,  for  nearly  two  weeks,  this  grant  from  his  father,  who  was 
as  much  entitled  to  receive  it  as  Castafieda,  but  should  not  at  least 
have  shown  it  to  him,  or,  so  far  as  appears,  mentioned  its  reception. 
That  Luis  Arenas  saw  it  for  the  first  time  in  Castaiieda's  hands  is 
positively  stated  by  himself. 

The  deposition  of  Cayetano  Arenas  was  taken  after  the  rejection 
of  the  claim  by  the  Board.  It  is  perhaps  not  unfair  to  say,  that 
testimony  of  so  much  importance,  and  introduced  for  the  first  time 
after  the  claim  was  rejected,  is  liable  to  much  suspicion. 

Luis  Arenas  was  examined  and  cross-examined  at  length  before 
the  Commissioners. 

The  fact  that  Pio  Pico  was  not  in  Los  Angeles  at  the  date  of  the 
grant  had  already  been  established.  Had  he  known  that  the  grant 
was  in  the  possession  of  his  son  from  the  fourth  of  July  until  he  de- 


310  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Redman  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

livered  it  to  Castaneda,  he  would  naturally  have  stated  it.  He 
does  not  allude  to  the  circumstance.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  that 
Cayetano  Arenas  could  have  received  this  grant,  made  for  the  ben- 
efit of  his  father,  amongst  others,  and  retained  it  in  his  possession 
for  nearly  two  weeks,  without  ever  mentioning  the  fact,  either  at 
the  time  or  even  subsequently,  up  to  the  moment  when  his  father 
testified  before  the  Commission. 

There  are  other  circumstances  which  tend  still  further  to  corrob- 
orate the  statements  of  Dias.  The  alleged  motive  of  making  this 
sale  was  the  exigency  of  public  afiairs,  which  compelled  the  Govern- 
ment to  avail  itself  of  all  the  resources  at  its  disposal.  It  was  dated 
within  a  few  days  of  the  capture  of  Monterey.  The  payment  and 
support  of  the  army  must  have  been  of  the  first  necessity,  and  the 
use  to  which  the  money  and  other  articles  would  most  probably 
have  been  applied ;  yet  Castro,  the  commanding  General,  states 
that'  he  never  received  any  money  arising  from  the  sale  of  the  or- 
chards for  the  expenses  of  the  war,  and  that  if  money  from  that 
source  had  been  so  appropriated,  he  would  certainly  have  known 
it.  On  his  cross-examination  he  repeats  that,  though  Pio  Pico 
might  have  applied  money  or  property  arising  from  this  sale  to 
public  uses  without  his  (witness')  knowledge,  yet  he  could  not  have 
applied  it  to  the  use  of  the  army. 

But  Luis  Arenas  negatives  the  idea  that  the  cattle  at  least  were 
applied  to  public  uses,  for  he  states  (perhaps  unguardedly)  that  the 
two  hundred  head  given  by  him  to  Pico  are  still  on  Pico's  rancho. 
This  fact  alone  would  be  sufficient  to  raise  a  suspicion  that  the  Gov- 
ernor did  not,  in  a  crisis  of  public  affairs,  in  good  faith,  attempt  to 
obtain  supplies  by  a  sale  of  public  domain ;  but  rather  that  he  has 
been  induced  at  a  subsequent  day,  for  his  individual  advantage,  to 
sign  an  antedated  title. 

But  even  if  there  were  less  force  in  all  these  circumstances,  one 
consideration  seems  to  me  decisive.  Neither  Pio  Pico  nor  Moreno 
have  been  examined  in  the  case. 

The  Governor,  in  the  absence  of  all  evidence  from  the  archives, 
was  the  person  who  of  all  others  could  have  explained  when  and 
why  he  made  the  grant ;  why  it  was  dated  at  Los  Angeles  ;  from 
whom  he  received  it  for  signature  ;  to  whom  he  sent  it ;  to  what 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  311 

llcdman  ct  al.  v.  United  States. 

uses  he  applied  the  property,  and  how  it  happened  that  he  signed  a 
receipt  for  it  at  Los  Angeles,  on  the  second  of  July,  as  received 
from  Castaneda,  Arenas  and  Dias,  when  no  one  of  them  was  at  that 
place. 

Moreno  might  have  explained  how  it  happened  that  the  grant 
was  in  this  case  written  by  Castaneda,  when  the  latter  was  at  its 
date,  and  for  some  weeks  subsequently,  at  a  distance  of  several 
hundred  miles.  If  the  grant  was  written  by  Castaneda  and  trans- 
mitted to  the  Governor  for  signature,  Moreno  might  perhaps  have 
told  us  how  it  happened  that  Castaneda  guessed  so  prophetically 
the  day  on  which  the  Governor  would  sign  it,  and  was  able  by  an- 
ticipation to  fill  in  the  date  at  the  time  he  drew  the  instrument. 
For  that  the  date  was  written  at  the  same  time  and  in  the  same 
hand  with  the  rest  of  the  document  is  obvious  on  inspection. 

In  a  case  like  this,  surrounded  by  circumstances  so  suspicious, 
and  depending,  on  the  part  of  the  claimants,  upon  the  testimony  ot 
Cayetano  Arenas  alone,  the  depositions  of  the  Governor  and  his 
secretary  ought  not  to  have  been  withheld. 

If  the  decision  of  this  cause  depended  upon  weighing  the  unsup- 
ported testimony  of  Arenas  against  testimony  equally  unsupported 
of  Dias,  the  duty  of  determining  which  had  sworn  falsely  would  be 
difficult  as  well  as  painful. 

But  the  testimony  of  Dias  is  corroborated  by  every  fact  in  the 
case,  while  that  of  Arenas,  if  not  inconsistent  with  them,  is  wholly 
unsupported,  and  explanation  from  the  best  if  not  the  only  source 
from  which  it  could  be  furnished,  is  withheld.  I  think  it  clearly 
my  duty  to  reject  the  claim. 

Having  reached  this  conclusion,  it  is  unnecessary  to  discuss  the 
question  whether  the  Governor  had  authority  to  sell  the  lands  of 
the  Missions,  or  at  least  the  orchards,  vineyards  and  cultivated 
portions,  which,  under  the  decree  of  the  Supreme  Government  and 
the  proclamation  of  Micheltorena,  had  been  restored  to  the  mis- 
sionary priests. 

After  the  above  opinion  was  read,  it  was  suggested  to  the  Court 
by  the  counsel  for  the  claimants,  that  the  deposition  of  Jos^  Matias 
Moreno,  which  was  on  file  in  the  case  of  T.  0,  Larkin  vs.  The 


312  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Kedman  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

United  States,  had  been,  by  consent,  admitted  as  evidence  in  this. 
The  claim  in  the  case  of  Larkin  vs.  United  States  is  founded  on 
the  same  grant  as  that  exhibited  in  this  case,  and  is  for  a  part  of 
the  orchard. 

In  the  opinion  delivered  in  that  case,  the  testimony  of  Moreno  is 
adverted  to,  as  follows : 

"  Moreno  testifies  that  the  signatures  of  himself  and  Pico  are 
genuine,  and  affixed  at  the  time  the  documents  bear  date,  and  that 
Pico  signed  them  in  his  presence.  lie  also  swears  that  the  docu- 
ments are  in  the  handwriting  of  Castafieda,  that  he  saw  him  write 
them,  and  that  they  were  written  under  his  (witness')  directions,  as 
he  was  much  occupied  with  official  duties. 

"  It  is  enough  to  say  with  respect  to  this  statement,  that  it  is 
abundantly  proved  by  the  testimony  of  General  Castro,  Benito 
Dias,  Luis  Arenas  and  Cayetano  Arenas,  that  Castaileda  could  not 
have  been  at  Santa  Barbara  on  either  the  thirtieth  of  June  or 
second  of  July,  the  days  on  which  the  documents  are  dated. 

"  The  statement  of  Cayetano  Arenas,  the  chief  witness  for  the 
claimants,  is  wholly  incompatible  with  the  idea  that  Castaileda 
could  have  been  at  Santa  Barbara,  and  written  the  grant  by  Mo- 
reno's directions. 

"Arenas  states  that  the  Governor  sent  the  grant  to  him,  '  with 
instructions  to  retain  it  until  Castafieda  came  from  the  upper 
country. '^ 

"  It  cannot  surely  be  pretended  that  at  that  time  Castaneda  was 
with  the  Governor,  writing  out  the  grant  and  receipt,  and  delivering 
the  articles  mentioned  in  the  latter." 

The  testimony  of  Moreno,  therefore,  entirely  fails  to  afford  that 
satisfactory  explanation  of  the  circumstances  which  the  Court  is 
entitled  to  expect.  It  has  only  served  to  confirm  me  in  the  opinion 
already  expressed  as  to  the  merits  of  the  claim. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  313 

Larkin  v.  United  States. 

THOMAS  0.  LARKIN,  claiming  part  of  the  Orchard  of 
Santa  Clara,  Appellant,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

The  bona  fides  of  the  grant  produced  is  not  sufficiently  established  by  the  evidence. 

But  if  the  grant  be  genuine,  the  claim  must  be  rejected,  on  the  ground  that  the 
Governor  had  no  power  to  grant  in  colonization,  or  sell  for  a  money  consid- 
eration, the  orclmrds  and  like  property  of  the  Missions. 

Claim  for  about  fifteen  acres  of  land  in  Santa  Clara  county,  re- 
jected by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimant. 

Thornton  &  Williams,  for  Appellant. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  is  founded  on  the  alleged  grant  to  Cas- 
tafieda.  Arenas  and  Dias,  the  merits  of  which  were  considered  in 
the  case  of  J.  W.  Redman  et  al.  vs.  The  United  States. 

The  testimony  in  the  two  cases  is  nearly  identical,  except  that  in 
this  the  depositions  of  John  Forster  and  Jose  Matias  Moreno  have 
been  taken. 

John  Forster  swears  to  the  genuineness  of  Pio  Pico's  and  Mo- 
reno's signatures.  I  do  not  understand  it  to  be  disputed  that  the 
documents  were  actually  signed  by  them.  The  allegation  on  the 
part  of  the  United  States  is,  that  the  signatures  were  affixed  after 
the  conquest  of  the  country. 

Forster  testifies  in  addition  that  the  grant  is  in  the  handwriting 
of  Francisco  Lopez,  now  deceased. 

The  deposition  of  this  witness  was  the  first  taken  in  the  cause. 
He  was  not  probably  aware  that  the  document  would  be  proved  to 
be  in  the  handwriting  of  Castaileda — a  fact  admitted  by  Moreno 
himself,  whose  testimony  was  taken  since  the  claim  was  rejected 
by  the  Board. 

Moreno  testifies  that  the  signatures  of  himself  and  Pico  are  gen- 
uine, and  affixed  at  the  times  the  documents  bear  date,  and  that 
Pico  signed  them  in  his  presence.  He  also  swears  that  the  docu- 
ments are  in  the  handwriting  of  Castafieda ;  that  he  saw  him  write 
them  ;  that  they  were  written  under  his  (witness')  directions,  as  he 
was  much  occupied  with  official  duties. 


314  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


Larkin  o.  United  States. 


It  is  enough  to  say  with  respect  to  this  statement,  that  it  is 
abundantly  proved  by  the  testimony  of  General  Castro,  Benito 
Dias,  Luis  Arenas  and  Cayetano  Arenas,  that  Castaileda  could  not 
have  been  at  Santa  Barbara  on  either  the  thirtieth  of  June  or  the 
second  of  July,  the  days  on  which  the  documents  are  dated. 

The  testimony  of  Cayetano  Arenas,  the  chief  witness  for  the 
claimants,  is  wholly  incompatible  with  the  idea  that  Castaileda 
could  have  been  at  Santa  Barbara  and  written  the  grant  by  Mo- 
reno's directions. 

Arenas  states  that  the  Governor  sent  the  grant  to  him,  "  with 
instructions  to  retain  it  until  Castaneda  came  from  the  upper 
country.''^  , 

It  cannot  surely  be  pretended  that  at  that  time  Castafieda  was 
with  the  Governor,  writing  out  the  grant  and  receipt,  and  dehvering 
the  articles  mentioned  in  the  latter. 

In  the  opinion  delivered  in  the  case  of  Redman  et  al.  vs.  The 
United  States^  the  omission  to  take  the  depositions  and  to  obtain 
explanations  from  Pico  and  Moreno  was  adverted  to. 

The  testimony  of  Moreno  taken  in  this  case  has  confirmed  me  in 
the  views  expressed  in  that  opinion,  as  to  the  character  of  this 
claim. 

On  the  hearing  of  the  cause  it  was  objected  on  the  part  of  the 
claimants,  that  the  depositions  of  Benito  Dias  and  others,  which 
are  contained  in  the  transcript  of  the  proceedings  of  the  Commis- 
sioners, were  not  properly  in  evidence  before  this  Court. 

Those  depositions  were  admitted  under  a  stipulation  which  pro- 
vided that  ''  the  depositions  of  Benito  Dias,  etc.,  taken  in  case 
number  seven  hundred  and  forty-two,  on  the  docket  of  this  Com-_ 
mission,  be  read  and  used  in  evidence  in  and  upon  the  hearing  of 
this  cause  before  this  Commission  only^^  etc. 

It  was  urged  that  this  stipulation  authorized  by  its  terms  the  ad- 
mission in  evidence  of  the  depositions  before  the  Board  only,  and 
that  if  the  testimony  was  desired  to  be  used  by  the  United  States 
in  this  Court,  it  must  be  regularly  taken.  The  District  Attorney 
thereupon  proposed  that  the  witness  should  be  called  by  the  Court, 
with  liberty  to  either  side  to  cross-examine.  This  proposition  was 
declined.     He  then  contended  that  by  the  Act  of  1851,  the  Court 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  315 

Larkin  v.  United  States, 

was  required  to  render  judgment  on  the  pleadings  and  evidence 
taken  before  the  Board,  and  contained  in  the  transcript,  as  ^Yell  as 
the  farther  evidence  taken  by  order  of  this  Court,  and  that  de- 
positions could  not  be  admitted  and  used  in  evidence  before  the 
Board  without  becoming  a  part  of  the  evidence  in  the  case  to  be 
considered  by  this  Court,  and  that  all  stipulations  which  allowed 
the  evidence  to  be  used  before  the  Board,  but  withheld  it  from  this 
Court,  were  controlled  and  avoided  by  the  positive  provisions  of  the 
statute. 

I  should  have  much  preferred  to  have  had  the  witnesses  reex- 
amined, with  full  opportunity  to  the  counsel  for  the  claimant  to 
cros-examine. 

The  United  States,  however,  insist  that  the  evidence  is  already 
in  the  case,  and  call  upon  the  Court  to  pass  upon  the  question. 

I  am  not  without  doubt  on  the  point,  but  I  incline  to  the  opinion 
that  whatever  evidence  is  legally  admitted  and  used  as  such  before 
the  Board,  becomes,  by  force  of  the  statute,  evidence  in  this  Court 
on  appeal,  notwithstanding  that  a  stipulation  of  counsel  may  have 
provided  that  it  should  be  used  and  read  before  the  Board  only. 

If  this  evidence  be  received,  I  think  it  clear,  as  before  stated, 
that  under  the  proofs,  the  case  must  be  rejected.  I  have  stated 
the  point  made  by  the  counsel  for  claimants,  that  it  may  be  availed 
of  in  the  Supreme  Court  on  appeal. 

But  even  without  these  depositions,  it  is  by  no  means  clear  that 
the  claim  should  be  confirmed  on  its  merits. 

There  would  still  remain  proof  that  the  grant  was  signed  at 
Santa  Barbara,  and  that  it  is  in  the  handwriting  of  Castaneda. 
The  statement  of  Cayetano  Arenas,  that  it  was  sent  to  him  on  the 
fourth  of  July,  to  be  retained  until  Castaneda  arrived  from  the 
upper  country,  of  itself  justifies  the  inference  that  Castaneda  could 
not  have  been,  at  the  time  the  grant  was  drawn,  with  the  Governor; 
and  the  hypothesis  that  he  might  have  drawn  it  and  sent  it  to  the 
Governor,  is  not  only  inconsistent  with  Moreno's  evidence,  but  ir- 
reconcilable with  the  fact  that  the  date  of  the  instrument  is  in  the 
same  handwritiiifg  and  evidently  written  at  the  same  time  with  the 
body  of  the  instrument. 

But  even  if  this  hypothesis  be  admitted,  it  destroys  the  presump-- 
21 


316  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Larkin  v.  United  States. 

tion  which  would  have  arisen  from  the  date,  that  the  instrument 
was  executed  on  that  day.  The  burden  would  then  be  on  the 
claimants  to  establish  the  date.  This  they  have  attempted  to  do 
by  the  evidence  of  Moreno  and  Cayetano  Arenas.  But  their  tes- 
timony is,  as  we  have  seen,  contradictory — the  one  swearing  that 
Castaiieda  drew  out  the  grant  by  his  direction,  because  he  was 
much  occupied — the  other,  that  it  was  sent  to  him  to  be  deUvered 
to  Castaneda  when  he  arrived  from  the  upper  country. 

The  only  evidence  of  the  payment  of  the  alleged  consideration  is 
the  receipt  of  Pio  Pico,  also  in  the  handwriting  of  Castaneda,  and 
purporting  to  be  written  on  the  second  of  July,  the  very  day  on 
which,  if  Cayetano  Arenas  is  to  be  believed,  the  Governor  must 
have  forwarded  the  original  grant  to  him  to  be  delivered  to  Cas- 
taneda. 

In  the  absence  of  all  proof  from  the  archives,  of  all  evidence  of  a 
possession  under  the  former  Government,  and  of  all  explanation 
from  the  Governor  as  to  the  circumstances  under  which  he  made 
the  grant  or  the  payment  of  the  consideration,  I  think  it  would  be 
the  duty  of  the  Court,  even  if  the  depositions  referred  to  be  ex- 
cluded, to  reject  the  claim. 

But  it  is  objected  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  that,  assum- 
ing the  grant  to  have  been  executed  on  the  day  it  is  dated,  and  for 
the  consideration  mentioned  in  it  or  shown  by  the  receipt,  it  is  void 
for  want  of  power  in  the  Governor  to  make  it. 

The  general  right  of  the  Governor  of  California  to  grant  vacant 
lands  formerly  pertaining  to  the  Missions,  is  not  disputed. 

It  is  urged,  however,  that  the  exercise  of  this  right  was,  at  the 
time  of  making  this  grant,  expressly  prohibited  by  the  Supreme 
Government. 

This  prohibition  is  supposed  to  be  contained  in  the  following 
official  note : 

"  Ministry  of  Justice  and  Public  Instruction. 
"  Most  Excellent  Sir  : 

"  His  Excellency  the  President  has  received  information  that  the 
Government  of  the  Department  has  ordered  to  be  put  up  at  public 
sale  all  the  property  pertaining  to  the  Missions,  which  your  prede- 
cessor had  ordered  to  he  returned  to  the  respective  missionaries  for 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  317 


Larkin  v.  United  States. 


the  direction  and  administration  of  their  temporalities.  Therefore, 
he  has  thought  proper  to  direct  me  to  say  that  the  said  Government 
will  report  upon  these  particulars,  suspending  thereupon  all  pro- 
ceedings respecting  the  alienation  of  the  before  mentioned  property 
until  the  determination  of  the  Supreme  Government. 

"  I  have  the  honor  to  communicate  it  to  your  Excellency  for  the 
purposes  indicated,  protesting  to  you  my  consideration  and  esteem. 

"  God  and  Liberty. 

''Mexico,  Nov.  Uth,  1845. 

"  MONTESDIOCA. 

^'  To  his  Excellency  the  Governor  of  the  Department  of  the  Cali- 
fornias." 

The  effect  of  this  instrument  upon  the  power  of  the  Governor  is 
the  question  to  be  examined. 

The  official  note  above  quoted  unquestionably  enjoins  a  suspen- 
sion of  all  further  proceedings  as  to  the  property  referred  to.  But 
what  property  does  it  refer  to  ?  The  document  itself  states  :  "  The 
property  which  your  predecessor  had  ordered  to  be  returned  to  the 
respective  missionaries  for  the  direction  and  administration  of  their 
temporahties." 

The  predecessor  referred  to  was  Micheltorena.  The  inquiry 
then  is,  what  property  had  Micheltorena  ordered  to  be  returned  to 
the  Missions  ? 

The  order  of  Micheltorena  is  contained  in  his  proclamation,  dated 
March  29th,  1843. 

But  to  understand  clearly  the  object  and  effect  of  that  procla- 
mation, the  then  existing  condition  of  the  Missions,  and  the  previous 
acts  of  the  Government  with  regard  to  them,  must  be  noticed. 

The  decree  by  which  the  Missions  of  California  were  secularized 
was  passed,  as  is  well  known,  in  1833.  Its  general  object  was  to 
convert  the  Missions  into  parishes  under  charge  of  secular  priests 
or  curates,  and  to  form  villages  and  distribute  the  lands  to  colonists. 
Of  the  houses  belonging  to  the  Missions,  one  was  to  be  selected  as 
the  residence  of  the  curate,  and  land  was  to  be  appropriated  to  him 
not  exceeding  two  hundred  varas  square — the  rest  were  to  be  used 
for  town  houses,  primary  schools  and  public  establishments  and 
offices. 


318  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


Larkin  v.  United  States. 


Various  decrees  were  made  and  instructions  given  during  the 
years  1833  and  1834,  having  for  their  object  to  secure  the  colo- 
nization, and  render  effective  the  secularization  of  the  Missions,  as 
provided  by  the  first  decree. 

By  the  instructions  given  to  Don  Jose  M.  Hljar,  Pohtical  Chief 
of  Upper  California,  provision  was  made  for  the  distribution  of  the 
movable  property  of  the  Missions,  and  on  the  ninth  of  August, 
1834,  Figueroa,  then  Governor  of  California,  made  provisional  reg- 
ulations on  the  same  subject,  "  that  the  fulfillment  of  the  law  might 
be  perfect."  By  these  regulations  the  Commissioners,  who  by  a 
previous  regulation  had  been  authorised  to  take  charge  of  all  the 
"  lands,  movable  securities  and  property  of  all  classes,"  were  re- 
quired to  make  out  inventories  of  the  property  of  the  Missions, 
"  such  as  houses,  churches,  workshops  and  other  local  things — 
stating  what  belongs  to  each  shop,  that  is  to  say,  utensils,  furniture 
and  implements;  as  also  of  the  vines  and  vegetables,  with  an  enu- 
meration of  the  shrubs  ;  also  an  estimate  of  the  number  of  cattle," 
etc.  The  inventories  were  to  be  kept  from  the  knowledge  of  the 
priests,  and  to  be  under  charge  of  the  Commissioners. 

It  is  apparent  from  the  whole  tenor  of  the  provisional  regulations, 
that  the  Government  intended  to  take  possession  of  all  the  property, 
real  and  personal,  belonging  to  the  Missions ;  that  the  curates  who 
were  to  be  appointed  were  to  be  supported  by  the  salaries  allowed 
by  the  Government,  and  that,  until  their  appointment,  the  mission- 
aries were  to  be  reheved  from  the  administration  of  temporalities, 
and  to  confine  themselves  to  their  spiritual  functions. 

The  provisional  regulations  made  by  Figueroa  seem  to  have  given 
rise  to  great  abuses,  for  in  January,  1839,  we  find  Governor  Alva- 
rado,  in  view  "  of  the  mournful  condition  in  which  affairs  now  are," 
making  a  provisional  law  defining  and  restricting  the  powers  of  the 
administrators  of  the  Missions,  and  providing  for  the  protection  of 
the  natives,  and  the  preservation  and  proper  application  of  the 
property. 

Such  seems  to  have  been  the  condition  of  the  Missions  at  the  date 
of  Micheltorena's  proclamation. 

The  first  article  of  that  proclamation  declares  that  the  Govern- 
ment will  order  the  Missions  of  San  Diego,  San  Jos(^,  etc.,  to  be 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  319 

Larkin  v.  United  States. 

delivered  up  to  the  Rev.  Padres  whom  the  respective  Prelate  may 
appoint,  and  said  Missions  shall  continue  to  be  administered  by 
them  as  tutors  to  the  Indians,  in  the  same  manner  as  they  held 
them  formerly. 

It  is  perhaps  not  very  clear  whether  by  this  proclamation  the 
Governor  intended  to  restore  to  the  Fathers  all  the  lands  remaining 
ungranted  at  the  time,  or  only  the  houses,  orchards,  gardens,  etc., 
which  owed  their  existence  to  the  labors  of  the  missionaries. 

The  second  article  of  the  proclamation  would  seem  to  favor  the 
first  view,  for  it  declares,  "  that  as  policy  makes  irrevocable  what 
had  already  been  done,  the  Missions  will  not  claim  any  lands  al- 
ready granted,  up  to  this  date,"  etc.,  seeming  to  imply  that  they 
were  authorised  to  claim  the  restoration  of  all  the  ungranted  land. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  evident  that  the  proclamation  was  made 
in  pursuance  of  the  President's  decree  of  November  17th,  1840. 
This  decree  was  issued  on  the  petition  of  the  Bishop  of  the  Cali- 
fornias. 

In  that  petition  the  Bishop  adverts  to  the  destitute  condition  of 
the  priests,  and  the  disorders  which  had  arisen  in  the  Missions,  and 
insists  that  "  the  houses  and  orchards  which  the  missionaries  had 
made,  which  are  contiguous  to  and  in  immediate  communication 
with  the  churches,  remain  to  the  use  and  benefit  of  the  missionaries." 

It  may,  therefore,  very  possibly  be,  that  the  restoration  ordered 
by  Micheltorena  was  only  that  of  the  houses,  orchards,  gardens, 
etc.,  solicited  by  the  Bishop,  and  w^as  not  intended  to  repossess  the 
Fathers  of  the  extensive  tracts  of  uncultivated  lands  formerly  per- 
taining to  the  establishments.  The  last  clause  of  the  proclamation 
clearly  shows  that  the  Government  intended  to  retain  the  right  of 
granting  such  lands,  for  the  Governor  promises  not  to  make  any 
new  grants  "  without  the  information  of  the  Reverend  Padres,  no- 
torious unoccupancy,  want  of  cultivation,  or  necessity."  It  is  pos- 
sible, however,  that  the  intention  of  Governor  Micheltorena  was  not 
merely  to  restore  the  houses,  orchards,  etc.,  to  the  Fathers,  but  by 
placing  all  the  lands  of  the  Missions  under  their  administration,  and 
subjecting  the  Indians  to  tutelage,  to  collect  and  protect  that  dis- 
persed and  oppressed  people. 

Be   this  as  it  may,  the  design  seems  to  have  been  very  soon 


320  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Larkin  v.  United  States. 

abandoned,  and  we  find  Micheltorena  granting  Mission  lands  as 
freely  as  any  of  his  predecessors. 

On  the  twenty-fourth  of  August,  1844,  the  Departmental  As- 
sembly passed  an  act  providing  for  the  sale  of  Mission  property  to 
defray  the  expense  of  the  war  with  the  United  States,  supposed  to 
be  impending.  The  war  did  not  however  occur,  and  on  the  twenty- 
first  of  April,  1845,  the  Assembly  made  a  decree  suspendmg  the 
sale  of  the  Missions,  and  reserving  and  appropriating  the  adjoining 
lands  as  common  lands. 

On  the  twenty-eighth  of  May,  1845,  a  decree  was  made  by  the 
Assembly,  directing  the  sale  of  certain  of  the  Missions,  which  were 
regarded  as  villages,  and  the  leasing  of  others.  "  To  expedite  the 
enforcement  of  this  decree,"  Governor  Pio  Pico,  on  the  twenty- 
eighth  of  October,  1845,  issued  regulations  for  the  renting  and 
alienation  of  the  Missions,  the  first  of  which  provided  that  certain  of 
them  should  be  sold  to  the  highest  bidder. 

On  the  thirtieth  of  March,  1846,  the  Assembly  made  a  decree 
authorising  the  Government  to  carry  into  effect  the  decree  of  the 
twenty-eighth  of  May  last,  and  providing  that  if  necessary  to  avoid 
their  total  ruin,  and  in  case  it  was  impracticable  to  lease  them, 
they  might  be  sold  at  public  auction  to  the  highest  bidder. 

The  Assembly  does  not  at  this  time  seem  to  have  been  aware  of 
the  order  signed  "  Montesdioca,"  which  issued  in  November  pre- 
ceding, for  we  find  from  their  records  that  on  the  fifteenth  of  April 
that  order  was  officially  communicated  to  them  by  the  Governor. 
No  subsequent  decree  with  reference  to  the  Mission  property  was 
made  until  after  the  conquest  of  the  country. 

It  is  not  easy  to  perceive  from  what  source  the  Assembly  de- 
rived the  power  they  thus  attempted  to  exercise.  By  the  Mexican 
Constitution  of  1843,  the  powers  of  the  Assemblies  under  the  colo- 
nization laws  were  preserved,  and  those  laws  were  required  to  be 
observed.  But  by  the  colonization  laws,  their  powers  were  con- 
fined to  approving  or  disapproving  the  concessions  made  by  the 
Governor ;  nor  have  I  been  able  to  discover  whence  they  derived 
the  authority  to  increase  the  powers  of  that  officer,  or  to  authorize 
sales  or  grants  by  him,  Avhich,  under  the  colonization  laws  in  force, 
he  had  otherwise  no  authority  to  make. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  321 


Larkin  v.  United  States 


Such  seems  to  have  been  subsequently  their  own  view,  for  on  the 
thirty-first  of  October,  1846,  an  act  was  passed  declaring  void  the 
sales  of  the  Missions  made  by  Pio  Pico,  as  Governor,  as  well  as  all 
other  acts  done  by  him  without  authority.  As  an  act  of  the  As- 
sembly, this  proceeding  may  have  no  force,  for  it  was  passed  after 
the  final  conquest  of  the  country  ;  but  it  serves  to  express  the 
opinion  of  that  body  as  to  the  validity  of  the  acts  of  the  Governor 
with  respect  to  the  Missions,  and  probably  as  to  the  extent  of  their 
own  authority  to  enlarge  his  powers  under  the  Colonization  and 
other  laws  of  the  nation,  and  the  regulations  and  orders  of  the  Su- 
preme Executive. 

The  order  signed  "  Montesdioca  "  is  dated,  as  we  have  seen,  on 
the  fourteenth  of  November,  1845.     The  decree  of  the  Assembly' 
which  Pio  Pico  endeavored  to  carry  into  efiect  by  his  proclamation 
of  October  28th,  1845,  was  passed  May  28th,  1845. 

It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  this  decree  occasioned  the  order 
of  November  14th,  from  the  Supreme  Government,  by  which  all 
further  proceedings  were  suspended,  and  it  would  seem  that  the 
Supreme  Government  interposed  at  the  earliest  moment  to  prevent 
the  Governor  and  Assembly  from  carrying  out  the  designs  which 
their  decree  and  the  Governor's  proclamation  indicated. 

The  words  of  the  order  in  the  original  are  "  Los  Bienes  per- 
tenentes  a  las  Misiones."  The  term  Bienes  appears  to  be  of  com- 
prehensive import,  and  includes  all  things,  not  being  persons,  which 
may  serve  for  the  uses  of  man.  It  may  perhaps  be  rendered  by 
the  word  "  property,"  and  would  thus  seem  to  refer  to  those  culti- 
vated lands,  orchards,  etc.,  and  other  appurtenances,  such  as 
houses,  workshops,  utensils,  etc.,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  had  been 
taken  possession  of  by  the  Administradores,  and  which,  on  the  pe- 
tition of  the  Bishop,  had  been  recognized  by  the  President  in  his 
decree  of  November  17th,  1840,  as  belonging  to  the  missionaries. 

It  is  to  be  observed  moreover,  that  the  President,  in  the  order 
last  referred  to,  declares  that  he  decrees  in  conformity  with  every- 
thing which  the  Reverend  Bishop  of  the  Californias  has  requested, 
and  "  also  in  conformity  with  the  law  of  November  7th,  1835, 
which  directs  the  Missions  to  be  restored  to  their  former  condition, 
for  which  purposes  orders  shall  be  issued  to  the  Governor  of  the 


322  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Larkin  v.  United  States. 

CaliforDias  for  the  restoration  to  the  Fathers  of  the  possessions  and 
property  used  by  them  under  their  administration  for  the  conver- 
sion of  the  heathen,"  etc. 

The  tern^s  of  this  order  indicate  that  the  Governor  referred  to 
the  property  used  by  the  missionaries  in  their  pious  Labors,  and  not 
to  the  extensive  tracts  of  vacant  land  which  might  formerly  have 
been  included  within  the  limits  of  the  establishments. 

That  the  law  of  1835  did  not  suspend  the  power  of  the  Gov- 
ernor to  grant  the  Mission  lands,  has  been  decided  by  the  Supreme 
Court,  in  the  case  of  The  United  States  vs.  A.  A.  Ritchie^  17 
How.  540.  The  grant  in  that  case  was  made  in  1842,  and  was 
therefore  subsequent  also  to  the  order  of  1840,  made  on  the  peti- 
tion of  the  Bishop. 

If  then  we  are  right  in  supposing  that  Micheltorena's  proclama- 
tion and  the  official  note  signed  "  Montesdioca,"  were  mainly  in- 
tended to  give  effect  to  the  order  of  1840,  and  the  law  of  1835, 
they  afford  no  other  or  greater  objections  to  this  claim  than  would 
be  presented  by  the  law  of  1835  and  the  order  of  1840  ;  and  that 
these  latter  did  not  prevent  the  Governor  from  granting  the  vacant 
lands  of  the  Missions  has  been,  in  effect,  decided  by  the  Supreme 
Court.  But,  if  this  question  Avere  still  open,  I  should  be  of  opinion 
that  the  right  of  the  Governor  to  grant  the  vacant  lands  of  the  Mis- 
sions ought  to  be  affirmed.  The  laws  of  1833  and  1834,  and  the 
Provisional  regulations,  instructions,  etc.,  made  in  pursuance,  have 
clearly  a  two-fold  object.  The  first  is  to  secularize  the  Missions 
and  convert  them  into  parochial  curacies.  The  second  is  to  take 
possession,  for  the  benefit  of  the  nation,  of  all  the  property  belong- 
ing to  the  Missions — such  as  workshops,  utensils,  furniture,  imple- 
ments ;  as  also  the  vineyards,  orchards,  cattle,  etc. 

The  law  of  November  26th,  1833,  in  terms  authorizes  the  De- 
partmental Government  "  to  use  in  the  most  convenient  manner, 
the  property  devoted  to  pious  uses  in  order  to  facilitate  the  opera- 
tions of  the  Commission"  (for  secularizing  the  Missions).  When, 
therefore,  the  Government  in  view  of  the  abuses  and  injustice  con- 
sequent upon  these  laws  and  regulations,  interposed  by  the  law  of 
1835,  the  order  of  1840  on  the  petition  of  the  Bishop,  the  procla- 
mation of  Micheltorena,  and  the  Montesdioca  document  of  1845,  it 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  323 

Larkin  v.  United  States. 

is  most  probable  that  it  merely  intended  to  suspend  or  annul  that 
portion  of  the  laws  of  1833  and  1834  which  related  to  the  '•^prop- 
erty "  of  the  Missions ;  and  not  to  interfere  with  the  disposition  of 
the  vacant  lands  adjacent  to  them,  to  which  the  Missions  could  pre- 
tend no  title,  either  in  law  or  in  justice. 

The  fact  that  Alvarado  and  Micheltorena  continued  to  grant  va- 
cant lands  belonging  to  the  Missions,  without,  so  far  as  appears,  ob- 
jection from  any  quarter,  strongly  corroborates  this  view,  and  it  was 
only  when  by  its  decree  of  May  28th,  1845,  the  Departmental  As- 
sembly proposed  to  sell  or  lease  the  entire  property  of  the  Missions, 
that  the  order  to  suspend  proceedings  was  issued. 

The  claim  of  Bishop  Alemany  for  the  church  lands,  before  the 
Board,  only  embraced  the  churches,  orchards,  vineyards,  ceme- 
teries, curates'  houses,  etc.  The  vacant  Mission  lands  are  not  in- 
cluded, nor  does  any  witness  in  that  case  enumerate  those  lands  as 
constituting  a  part  of  the  "  property  "  of  the  Missions,  and  this 
claim  is  in  strict  conformity  with  that  which  we  have  seen  was  alone 
insisted  on  by  the  Bishop  in  his  petition  to  the  President  in  1840. 

We  have  thus  the  practical  construction  given  to  these  laws  by 
both  the  Government  and  the  missionaries. 

Admitting  that  the  Governor's  authority  to  grant,  under  the 
colonization  laws,  the  vacant  lands  formerly  included  within  the 
limits  of  the  missionary  establishments,  it  seems  equally  clear 
that  under  the  law  of  1835,  the  order  of  1840  on  the  petition  of 
the  Bishop,  the  proclamation  of  Micheltorena  and  the  order  of 
1845  signed  "  Montesdioca,"  he  was  without  authority  to  grant 
the  orchards,  vineyards,  workshops,  buildings,  etc.,  which  the 
labor  of  the  Fathers  had  created,  and  to  the  enjoyment  of  which, 
as  urged  by  the  Bishop,  they  had  a  just  and  undeniable  claim. 

Even  if  the  decree  of  the  Assembly  of  May  28th,  1845,  and  that 
of  March  30th,  1846,  passed  to  give  eifect  to  it,  could  be  regarded 
as  conferring  any  authority  on  the  Governor  not  previously  pos- 
sessed by  him,  they  did  not  authorize  a  sale  such  as  that  alleged  in 
this  case,  for  by  the  terms  of  both,  the  sales,  if  found  necessary, 
were  required  to  be  made  at  public  auction. 

But  the  grant  produced  refers  for  the  authority  of  the  Governor 
to  a  decree  of  the  Assembly  of  the  thirteenth  of  April,  1846.     I 


324  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Larkin  v.  United  States. 

have  not  been  able  to  discover  what  decree  of  the  Departmental 
Assembly  is  here  alluded  to ;  none  of  that  day  has  been  produced, 
nor  is  any  such  found  in  the  records  of  the  proceedings  of  that  body. 

It  is  urged,  however,  that  the  order  contained  in  the  Montesdioca 
document  was  revoked  by  the  communication  signed  ''Tornel,"  and 
addressed  to  the  Commandant  General  of  the  Californias,  under 
date  of  March  10th,  1846. 

With  reference  to  this  document,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  it 
appears  to  be  a  circular  addressed  to  the  Commandant  General, 
amongst  other  functionaries.  All  of  it  except  the  address  is  marked 
as  a  quotation,  and  its  object  seems  to  have  been  to  stimulate  the 
public  authorities  to  a  vigorous  defense  of  the  national  territory, 
and  the  maintenance  of  the  national  honor.  The  only  clause  by 
which  any  authority  can  be  deemed  to  be  conferred  on  the  Gov- 
ernor, is  that  in  which  it  is  stated  that  the  Supreme  Government 
"  expects  from  your  loyalty  and  patriotism  that  you  will  dispose 
such  measures  as  you  may  judge  most  suitable  for  the  defense  of 
the  Department,  for  which  object  ample  power  is  granted  to  you 
and  Sefior  the  Governor.'''^ 

It  is  evident  that  the  power  here  conferred  was  given  to  the 
Commandant  General  as  amply  as  to  the  Governor.  It  can  hardly 
be  pretended  that  under  it  the  Commandant  General  could  have 
sold  the  vineyards  and  orchards  of  the  Missions  to  whomsoever  and 
at  whatever  price  he  chose. 

It  appears  to  me  that  the  object  of  this  circular  was  merely  to 
authorize  and  direct  the  General  Commanding  to  take  the  proper 
mihtary  measures  for  the  defense  of  the  country,  and  that  had  it 
been  intended  to  revoke  or  modify  the  order  signed  "  Montesdioca,'* 
prohibiting  the  sale  of  the  Mission  property,  and  which  was  issued 
only  three  months  previously,  that  object  would  have  been  une- 
quivocally expressed,  and  the  Governor  directed  to  make  sales  of 
that  property  to  procure  resources  for  the  war. 

The  Board  of  Commissioners  were  unanimously  of  opinion  that 
this  circular  conferred  no  power  to  make  the  sale  at  bar,  and  in 
that  opinion  I  concur. 

From  the  fore<2;oino;  it  follows  that,  admittini:;  the  Governor's 
right  to  grant  the   vacant  lands  of  the   Missions,  or  even  to  sell 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  325 

Little  V.  United  States. 

them,  as  to  -which  latter  I  express  no  opinion,  it  is  nevertheless 
clear  that  he  had  no  authority  either  to  grant  or  sell  the  vineyards, 
orchards,  cemeteries,  Mission  buildings,  etc.,  which,  on  the  petition 
of  the  Bishop,  had  been  recognized  by  the  President  as  belonging 
to  the  Fathers — which  had  been  restored  to  them  by  Micheltorena, 
and  the  sale  of  which  under  the  Assembly  decree  of  May  28th, 
1845,  the  Supreme  Government  had  promptly  interposed  to  pre- 
vent. 

If  these  views  be  correct,  the  claim  must  be  rejected  for  want  of 
authority  in  the  Governor  to  make  the  grant. 


MILTOjST  little,  claiming  five  leagues  op  land  on  the 
Sacramento  river,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 


The  claim  must  be  rejected,  because  the  proof  fails  to  establish  that  Josefa  Mar- 
tinez, tlie  assignor  of  claimant,  was  one  of  those  in  whose  favor  the  so-called 
general  title  issued,  or  that  she  occupied  or  cultivated  the  land  claimed. 


Claim  for  five  leagues  of  land  in  Yolo  county,  rejected  by  the 
Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimant. 

Thornton  &  Williams,  and  Albert  Packard,  for  Appellants. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  and  Peyton  &  Duer, 
for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  is  under  the  general  title  of  Micheltorena. 
This  title  is  as  follows : 

"  The  Supreme  Departmental  Government  not  being  able  to 
extend,  one  by  one,  the  respective  titles  to  all  the  citizens  who 
have  petitioned  for  lands,  with  a  favorable  information  from  Don 
Augustus  Sutter,  Captain  and  Judge  in  charge  of  the  jurisdiction 
of  New  Helvetia  and  Sacramento,  I,  in  the  name  of  the  Mexican 
nation,  by  these  letters  confer  upon  them  and  their  famihes  the 
lands  described  in  their  applications  and  maps,  to  all  and  each 


326  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Little  V.  United  States. 

of  them,  who  has  sohcited  and  obtained  favorable  information 
from  said  Senor  Sutter,  up  to  this  day,  so  that  no  one  can  dis- 
pute their  titles.  Senor  Sutter  will  give  them  a  copy  of  this  in 
furtherance  of  a  formal  title,  with  which  they  will  present  them- 
selves to  this  Government,  to  extend  the  same  title  in  the  proper 
form,  and  upon  corresponding  sealed  paper ;  and  to  estabhsh  this 
in  all  time  I  give  this  document,  which  will  be  recognized  and  ac- 
knowledged by  all  the  authorities,  civil  and  military,  of  the  Mexican 
nation,  in  this  and  the  other  departments.  Duly  authenticated  with 
the  seal  of  the  Government  and  the  mihtary  seal,  in  Monterey,  this 
twenty-second  of  December,  1844. 

(Signed)  "  Miciieltorbna." 

The  claimants  have  produced  in  evidence  a  petition  and  accom- 
panying map,  addressed  to  Governor  Micheltorena,  and  soliciting 
five  leagues  of  land  on  the  borders  of  the  Sacramento,  immediately 
opposite  to  the  establishment  of  Seilor  Sutter. 

The  petition  is  dated  Monterey,  April  1st,  1844. 

On  the  margin  of  this  petition  is  an  order  of  reference  to  the 
Secretary  of  Dispatch. 

On  the  back  of  the  document  is  indorsed  an  order  signed  by 
Manuel  Jimeno,  directing  the  petition  to  be  referred  to  Senor 
Sutter  for  information  as  to  its  contents,  and  that  it  be  directed 
afterwards  to  the  Alcalde  of  San  Jose,  ''  that  he  may  say  what 
occurs  to  him." 

This  order,  as  well  as  that  by  the  Governor  in  the  margin  of  the 
petition,  is  dated  March  29th,  1844. 

Beneath  the  order  of  Jimeno  is  written  the  "  informe  "  of  Sutter, 
which  merely  states  that  the  land  solicited  is  unoccupied.  This 
certificate  is  dated  April  15th,  1844. 

The  claimants  have  also  produced  in  evidence  a  copy  of  the  gen- 
eral title,  with  a  certificate  of  Sutter  annexed  to  it,  stating  it  to  be 
a  copy  delivered  to  Josefa  Martinez  "  for  the  ends  convenient." 
This  certificate  is  dated  April  7th,  1845. 

Upon  these  documents  the  claimants  rely  to  establish  that  Josefa 
Martinez  was  one  of  the  class  in  whose  favor  the  general  title  issued, 
and  that  she  availed  herself  of  the  right__ therein  conferred  to  obtain 
a  copy  of  the  title  certified  by  Sutter. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  327 

Little  V.  United  States. 

The  first  objection  urged  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  is,  that 
this  copy  was  not  furnished  as  stated  in  Sutter's  certificate ;  but 
that  the  latter  has  been  recently  given  and  antedated.  Much  tes- 
timony has  been  taken  by  the  United  States  in  support  of  this  alle- 
gation.    A  great  part  of  it,  however,  is  wholly  inadmissible. 

In  examining  the  depositions  I  shall  confine  my  attention  to  those 
parts  of  them  which,  by  the  rules  of  law,  are  admissible  in  evidence. 

The  copy  of  the  general  title,  with  Sutter's  certificate  annexed, 
is  produced  by  one  Charles  Brown.  This  witness  states  that  in 
August  or  September  of  1848,  Robert  T.  Ridley,  who  claimed  to 
be  owner  of  the  land  with  Milton  Little,  the  present  claimant, 
placed  in  his  hands  the  papers  produced  by  him  as  collateral  se- 
curity, for  moneys  advanced  to  Ridley  by  the  witness,  and  that 
they  have  remained  in  his  possession  ever  since.  The  loan  to  Rid- 
ley the  witness  admits  to  have  been  repaid  to  him  in  1849,  but  he 
retained  the  papers  in  his  possession  because  Ridley  did  not  ask 
him  to  redeliver  them. 

On  his  cross-examination,  the  witness  gives  an  account  of  a  trip 
to  Sacramento,  to  see  General  Sutter,  and  of  his  leaving  the  papers 
Avith  A.  Bartol,  by  whom  they  were  subsequently  returned  to  him. 
It  is  contended  by  the  United  States  that  the  object  of  this  trip  was 
to  procure  the  signature  of  Sutter  to  the  certificate,  and  that  that 
object  was  subsequently  effected  by  Bartol,  with  whom  the  papers 
were  left  for  the  purpose. 

Brown  states  that  in  a  conversation  with  A.  Packard,  counsel  for 
claimant,  in  his  ofiice,  about  two  or  three  months  before  the  taking 
of  his  deposition,  he  mentioned  that  he  had  some  papers  relating  to 
the  land.  That  Packard  asked  him  for  them,  and  he  brought  them 
to  him.  That  shortly  afterwards  he  went  to  Sacramento  on  busi- 
ness of  his  own,  and  also  to  ask  of  General  Sutter  if  the  signature 
was  genuine. 

The  account  given  by  the  witness  of  the  object  of  this  trip,  and 
his  own  reasons  for  making  it,  are  by  no  means  satisfactory.  When 
first  interrogated  as  to  the  other  business  he  had  in  Sacramento,  he 
refused  to  answer,  but  subsequently  stated  that  his  business  was 
with  Bartol ;  that  he  had  no  previous  appointment  with  him  ;  that 
he  did  not  know  whether  he  would  find  him  there  or  not ;  that  they 


328  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Little  V.  United  States. 

had  had  some  previous  conversation  about  horses,  and  he  went  up 
to  see  about  selUng  them. 

When  asked  as  to  his  reasons  for  taking  such  an  interest  in  as- 
certaining the  genuineness  of  the  paper,  he  rephed,  that  it  was  only 
such  an  interest  as  he  would  feel  in  the  affairs  of  any  friend.  That 
he  heard  through  Mr.  Bellamy  that  his  friend  Mr.  Bassham  was  in- 
terested in  the  claim.  That  he  did  not  mention  to  Bellamy  that  he 
had  the  papers,  nor  was  he  requested  by  Bassham  to  go  up  to  Sac- 
ramento. That  he  had  never  spoken  to  the  latter  on  the  subject 
previous  to  his  trip  to  Sacramento  ;  and  that  neither  Bassham  nor 
any  one  else  had  ever  spoken  to  him  on  the  subject  of  his  going  to 
Sacramento  before  he  went.  That  no  person  paid  him  for  the  trip 
or  offered  to  do  so,  nor  did  any  one  know  he  was  going.  That  he 
never  asked  any  one  acquainted  with  Sutter's  signature  whether 
it  was  genuine  or  not ;  that  he  never  asked  Sutter  himself  whether 
he  had  signed  it,  although  he  had  frequently  met  him  since  the 
papers  were  in  his  possession  ;  that  he  has  had  no  reason  recently 
to  doubt  the  genuineness  of  the  signature,  and  has  never  doubted  it. 

These  statements  of  Brown  bear  strong  marks  of  improbability. 
It  is  difficult  to  believe,  from  his  own  account,  that  his  sole  motive 
in  seeking  General  Sutter  was  to  ask  if  his  signature  w^as  genuine. 
That  fact  could  readily  have  been  ascertained  by  inquiry  of  any 
one  of  the  many  persons  acquainted  with  it ;  and  the  witness  him- 
self states  that  he  never  doubted  it.  If  he  took  so  deep  an  interest 
in  the  affairs  of  his  friend  Bassham,  it  is  strange  that  he  never  spoke 
to  him  on  the  subject  of  the  papers,  and  that  he  never  even  men- 
tioned to  Bellamy  or  to  Packard  his  intention  to  take  this  disinter- 
ested excursion  to  Sacramento,  to  ascertain  a  fact  which  he  admits 
he  never  doubted.  That  his  sole  object  in  going  to  Sacramento  was 
to  see  Sutter  is,  I  think,  evident.  He  arrived  in  the  middle  of  the 
night  and  slept  on  board  the  steamboat,  and  he  came  back  by  the 
return  boat  at  two  P.  M.  of  the  day  on  which  he  arrived.  That  he 
did  not  meet  Bartol  by  appointment  is  admitted  by  himself,  and 
testified  to  by  Bartol ;  and  the  latter  is  unable  to  recollect  that  any 
conversation  took  place  between  them  on  that  day  relating  to  a  sale 
of  horses. 

But  the  testimony  of  Bartol  discloses  unmistakably  the  real  ob- 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  329 


Little  V.  United  States. 


ject  of  Brown's  visit  to  Sutter.  This  witness  states  that  about  seven 
o'clock  on  the  morning  of  Brown's  arrival  he  met  him  in  front  of 
the  hotel.  That  in  walking  up  J  street  thej  perceived  General 
Sutter  in  a  drinking  saloon,  in  a  state  of  intoxication.  Such  being 
his  condition,  nothing  was  said  about  business,  although  Brown  may- 
have  expressed  his  annoyance  at  the  circumstance.  That  he  and 
Brown  were  together  during  the  day,  and  about  an  hour  previous 
to  the  departure  of  the  steamer,  Brown  asked  him  to  write  a  letter 
to  General  Sutter,  being  unable  to  do  so  himself  on  account  of  a 
felon  on  his  finger.  He  took  Brown  to  the  stage  office,  where  the 
letter  was  written  by  one  of  the  agents.  Brown  then  inquired 
when  he  (the  witness)  was  going  to  Marysville,  saying  that  he  had 
important  business  in  San  Francisco,  and  that  if  he  (witness)  would 
hire  a  team  at  Marysville  and  find  Sutter  when  he  was  sober,  he 
would  pay  his  expenses,  at  the  same  time  handing  him  a  package 
containing  the  letter  which  had  just  been  written  and  a  document 
in  Spanish.  The  witness  was  wholly  unable  to  read  the  document, 
but  Brown  said  to  him  that  it  was  for  a  tract  of  land  on  the  other 
side  of  the  river. 

After  delivering  the  package,  Brown  left  Sacramento  in  the 
steamer,  and  about  ten  days  afterwards,  the  witness  being  at 
Marysville,  drove  out  to  Hock  farm,  the  residence  of  Sutter,  to  see 
him.  Finding  him  at  home,  he  delivered  to  him  the  package  and 
the  letter  of  Brown.  General  Sutter  examined  the  paper  and  re- 
tired to  another  room,  and  after  an  absence  of  from  five  to  fifteen 
minutes  he  returned  and  handed  the  papers  back  to  the  witness. 
When  he  first  presented  them  to  Sutter,  he  (witness)  observed  to 
him  tliat  ''  he  was  only  carrying  out  the  wishes  of  an  old  friend, 
Mr.  Charles  Brown,  by  bringing  down  those  papers  to  him,"  (Sut- 
ter) and  Sutter  replied,  either  then  or  when  he  returned  the  papers 
to  the  witness,  that  it  afforded  him  pleasure  to  render  assistance  to 
an  old  soldier ;  that  "he  knew  that  man,"  (mentioning  some  Span- 
ish name)  and  that  •'  a  grant  had  been  given  him  for  certain  lands." 

After  receiving  the  papers  from  General  Sutter,  the  witness  re- 
tained them  in  his  possession  until  he  returned  them  to  Brown, 
about  the  end  of  March  or  first  of  April.  When  the  papers  were 
dehvered,  Brown  inquired  what  had  been  the  witness'  expenses,  to 


330  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Little  V.  United  States. 

which  the  latter  replied  "  nothing."  The  witness  does  not  recollect 
whether  Brown  expressed  any  satisfaction  at  the  reception  of  the 
papers. 

That  the  paper  delivered  to  Bartol  and  by  him  returned  to  Brown 
is  the  same  as  that  now  produced  by  the  latter,  is  positively  stated 
by  Brown  himself,  the  claimant's  witness.  He  omits  all  mention, 
however,  of  the  letter  addressed  to  Sutter,  which  accon>panied  it, 
but  states  that  he  told  Bartol  to  see  Sutter  and  ascertain  whether 
"  it  was  all  right." 

Upon  a  careful  consideration  of  the  account  of  the  transaction 
given  by  these  two  witnesses,  I  have  been  unable  to  entertain  a 
doubt  as  to  its  true  character. 

The  extreme  improbability  of  Brown's  story  has  already  been 
alluded  to.  It  is  inconceivable  that  he  should  have  felt  so  much 
solicitude  to  ascertain  the  genuineness  of  a  signature  which  was 
unsuspected  by  himself,  as  not  only  to  go  to  Sacramento  for  the 
purpose,  but  to  be  willing  to  pay  the  expenses  of  a  messenger  to 
Sutter  to  make  the  inquiry.  If  his  instructions  to  Bartol  were  such 
as  he  states,  the  latter  failed  to  accomplish  the  objects  of  his  jour- 
ney ;  for  it  does  not  appear  that  any  inquiry  whatever  was  made 
by  Bartol,  at  his  interview  with  Sutter,  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the 
signature,  nor  did  Sutter  say  a  word  on  the  subject.  If  the  only 
business  of  Brown  or  of  Bartol  with  Sutter  was  to  ask  him  if  the 
signature  was  his,  it  would  be  most  natural  that  Sutter  should  have 
looked  at  the  document  and  communicated  the  result  of  his  inspec- 
tion to  Bartol.  On  the  contrary,  he  reads  the  letter  of  Brown  and 
retires  to  another  room,  from  whence  after  a  short  absence  he  re- 
appears and  expresses  his  pleasure  at  being  able  to  serve  an  old 
soldier  and  friend.  The  nature  of  the  service  he  was  rendering  is 
sufficiently  clear.  It  must  have  been  something  more  than  the  ac- 
knowledgment of  a  signature  of  his  own.  To  obtain  that,  no  appeal 
to  ancient  friendship  could  have  been  necessary,  and  as  the  only 
paper  returned  by  Sutter  to  Bartol  was  that  which  Bartol  had  just 
handed  to  him.  Brown,  when  he  received  it  from  Bartol,  must  have 
been  as  unsatisfied  as  to  its  genuineness  as  when  he  first  sought 
General  Sutter  to  ascertain,  as  he  says,  a  fact  which  he  also  states 
he  never  doubted. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  331 


Little  V.  United  States. 


Bartol,  it  is  true,  does  not  swear  that  he  saw  Sutter  write  the 
certificate  ;  nor  does  he  admit  that  he  knew  the  contents  of  Brown's 
letter  to  Sutter.  He  even  states  that  he  had  then  no  idea  what 
Sutter  was  to  do  with  the  paper ;  nor  did  he  inquire  of  Brown,  as 
he  supposed  the  letter  to  Sutter  explained  all.  But  even  this  ver- 
sion of  the  story  is  inconsistent  with  Brown's  declaration  that  he 
told  Bartol  to  ask  Sutter  if  the  paper  was  "  all  right ;"  and  whether 
or  not  we  suppose  Bartol  to  have  been  aware  of  the  nature  of  the 
service  expected  from  Sutter,  it  is  clear  that  it  was  something  dif- 
ferent from  answering  a  simple  inquiry  whether  a  signature  pur- 
porting to  ,be  his  was  genuine. 

It  seems  to  me  that  all  the  circumstances  of  the  transaction 
point  as  unmistakably  to  its  true  nature  as  if  it  had  been  positively 
sworn  to  by  witnesses  who  had  seen  Sutter  in  the  act  of  writing 
the  certificate. 

But  there  are  other  considerations  which  tend  to  confirm  this 
view. 

The  document  in  question  is  produced  for  the  first  time  by  Brown, 
a  witness  examined  in  this  Court  April  3d,  1857,  more  than  four 
years  after  the  claim  was  presented  to  the  Board.  Up  to  that  time 
no  one  seems  to  have  known  or  suspected  its  existence.  Even  Bel- 
lamy, who  testifies  that  at  the  request  of  Josefa  Martinez  and  her 
husband,  and  under  an  agreement  with  them,  he  had  the  petition 
drawn  up,  that  he  presented  it  to  Micheltorena  and  afterwards  to 
Sutter,  and  that  lie  took  possession  of  the  land  under  his  agreement 
with  Josefa  Martinez,  does  not  pretend  that  any  copy  of  the  gen- 
eral title  was  obtained,  or  was  certified  to  by  Sutter. 

The  mode  in  which  Brown  accounts  for  its  possession  by  him, 
and  its  long  suppression,  is  highly  improbable.  For  it  can  hardly 
be  supposed  that  if  it  was  placed  by  Ridley  in  his  hands  as  security 
for  a  loan,  it  would  not  have  been  returned  when  the  loan  was  paid. 

The  only  person  to  whom  Brown  states  he  showed  or  even  men- 
tioned the  document,  before  his  trip  to  Sacramento,  is  Albert  Pack- 
ard ;  and  he  has  not  been  examined.  Nor  has  Sutter's  testimony 
been  taken,  although  his  interests  and  his  feelings  would  naturally 
have  led  him  to  seek  and  to  insist  upon  an  opportunity  of  denying 
and  refuting  so  injurious  an  accusation. 
22 


332  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Little  V.  United  States. 

The  copy  of  the  general  title  produced  by  Brown  is  sworn  by 
Mr.  Bidwell  to  be  in  his  handwriting.  The  witness  is  wholly  unable 
to  recollect  having  made  it,  and  states  that  he  had  forgotten  every 
thing  about  it  until  it  was  shown  to  him  on  the  stand.  He  recog- 
nizes, however,  the  handwriting,  and  thinks  it  must  have  been  de- 
livered to  Sutter,  for  whom  he  made  a  considerable  number  of 
copies  of  the  general  title. 

It  is  evident  that  the  fact  of  this  copy  being  in  BidwelFs  hand- 
writing does  not  bear  upon  the  point  in  dispute — viz.,  as  to  whether 
the  copy  was  delivered  and  the  certificate  attached  at  the  date  of 
the  latter.  That  many  copies  of  the  original  title  may  have  been 
prepared  by  Sutter's  direction,  in  order  that  they  might  be  deliv- 
ered when  applied  for,  is  probable.  I  think  the  testimony  which 
has  been  reviewed  leads  us  irresistibly  to  the  conclusion  that  one  of 
these  copies  having  by  some  means  come  into  the  possession  of 
Brown,  a  certificate  of  Sutter  was  attached  to  it  at  the  time  it  was 
presented  to  Sutter  by  Bartol. 

But  the  testimony  of  Samuel  C.  Heaton  removes  any  doubts 
which  might  otherwise  have  been  entertained  on  this  point. 

This  witness  swears  that  he  accompanied  Bartol  on  his  visit  to 
Sutter ;  that  Bartol  and  Sutter  had  a  little  conversation  concerning 
a  paper  that  the  former  wished  Sutter  to  sign  ;  that  Sutter  objected 
but  finally  consented,  took  the  paper,  left  the  room  and  returned 
with  the  paper.  If  there  was  any  doubt  as  to  the  identity  of  the 
paper,  the  evidence  of  this  witness  on  that  point  might  be  open  to 
criticism.  But  Bartol  and  Brown  himself  admit  that  the  paper 
given  by  Brown  to  Bartol  and  by  the  latter  presented  to  Sutter,  is 
the  paper  now  produced.  The  only  question  is — Was  the  object 
of  Bartol's  interview  to  ascertain  the  genuineness  of  the  signature 
or  to  obtain  an  antedated  signature  ?  The  testimony  of  Heaton  has 
merely  served  to  confirm  me  in  a  conclusion  to  which  I  would  inde- 
pendently of  it  have  irresistibly  been  led. 

Discarding,  then,  the  copy  of  the  general  title  and  the  certifi- 
cate of  Sutter,  as  afibrding  no  evidence  of  the  claimant's  title,  the 
only  documentary  evidence  which  remains  is  the  petition  with  the 
marginal  order,  the  order  of  reference  signed  by  Jimeno,  and  the 
"  informe  "  signed  by  Sutter.  I  do  not  understand  that  the  gen- 
uineness of  Micheltorena's  or  Jimeno's  signature  is  disputed. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  333 


Little  V.  United  States. 


There  is,  however,  a  discrepancy  in  the  dates  of  the  several  doc- 
uments for  which  I  have  been  unable  to  account.  The  petition  of 
Josefa  Martinez  (which  it  may  be  remarked  is  not  signed  by  her) 
is  dated  April  1st,  1844.  The  marginal  order  of  Micheltorena  and 
the  order  of  reference  signed  Jimeno  are  both  dated  March  29th, 
1844 — three  days  before  the  petition  purports  to  have  been  written. 
I  have  endeavored  in  vain  to  conjecture  some  satisfactory  explana- 
tion of  this  circumstance.  It  might  have  been  supposed  that  Josefa 
Martinez,  being  an  ignorant  or  careless  person,  had,  when  drawing 
the  petition,  mistaken  the  date  ;  but  Bellamy,  the  principal  witness 
for  the  claimant,  testifies  that  the  petition  and  map  were  draw^n  up 
under  his  direction  by  Francisco  Arce,  and  that  he  (the  witness)  then 
presented  them  to  the  Governor,  who  wrote  the  marginal  order  in 
his  presence.  Arce  was  a  person  of  intelligence  and  consideration, 
and  at  one  time  filled  an  office  under  the  Government.  It  is  sin- 
gular that  both  Arce  and  Bellamy  should  have  fallen  into  this  mis- 
take, or  else,  if  the  petition  be  correctly  dated,  that  the  Governor 
and  the  Secretary  should  have  both  accidentally  antedated  the 
orders  signed  by  them. 

But,  assuming  the  petition  to  have  been  drawn  and  the  orders  of 
reference  to  have  been  made  as  appears  on  the  documents,  it  is  also 
necessary  to  bring  the  petitioner  within  the  class  of  persons  referred 
to  in  the  general  title,  to  show  that  previous  to  the  issuing  of  that 
document  a  favorable  report  of  Sutter  had  been  obtained. 

The  whole  case  on  the  part  of  the  claimant  fails,  unless  it  satis- 
factorily appears  that  the  favorable  report  of  Sutter  was  made  at 
the  time  it  bears  date. 

The  evidence  on  this  point  consists  of  the  testimony  of  George 
W.  Bellamy,  and  the  presumption  arising  from  the  date  affixed  to 
the  report,  with  proof  of  the  genuineness  of  the  signature. 

But  Bellamy,  though  he  swears  that  General  Sutter  signed  the 
report  in  his  presence,  does  not  state  when  it  was  signed.  He  adds 
that  "  he  thinks,  though  he  is  not  certain,  that  Mr.  Bidwell  or 
Major  Reading  wrote  the  body  of  the  report  for  General  Sutter, 
and  then  Sutter  signed  it." 

The  body  of  the  report  is  admitted  to  be  in  the  handwriting  of 
Sutter  himself.     This  mistake,  which  may  have  arisen  from  mere 


334  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Little  V.  United  States. 

inaccuracy  of  memory,  would  not  of  itself  justify  any  inferences  un- 
favorable to  the  witness.  It  is  proper  to  notice  it,  however,  among 
other  circumstances  to  be  considered  hereafter,  upon  a  just  appre- 
ciation of  which  his  credibility  must  depend. 

As  the  principal,  if  not  the  only  evidence  with  regard  to  the  oc- 
cupation of  the  land  is  that  given  by  Bellamy,  the  testimony  on 
that  subject  may  now  be  examined. 

Bellamy  testifies  that  after  Sutter  had  signed  his  report,  he 
(witness)  returned  the  paper  to  Micheltorena,  and  upon  his  as- 
surance that  the  grant  would  be  issued,  took  possession  of  the  land 
under  an  agreement  with  Josefa  Martinez  and  her  husband.  That 
Sutter  put  him  in  possession  ;  and  that  he  placed  cattle  on  it,  and 
having  borrowed  tools  from  Sutter,  made  a  corral  upon  it.  That 
afterwards  he  and  Matthews  were  about  to  drive  some  cattle  upon 
it  from  the  Salinas  plains,  but  were  prevented  by  Larkin,  to  whom 
Matthews  was  indebted.  That  the  revolution  Avhich  soon  after  broke 
out  prevented  them  from  getting  more  cattle  ;  and  that  he  then 
authorized  Robert  Ridley,  who  was  living  at  General  Sutter's,  to 
take  possession  of  the  rancho,  take  care  of  the  cattle  and  estabhsh 
a  ferry,  which  he  did.  That  Ridley  remained  on  the  rancho  a  little 
less  than  a  year,  when  he  died.  He  (Bellamy)  then  authorized 
George  McDougal  to  take  possession  of  the  property  and  cattle, 
which  McDougal  did,  and  remained  there  until  1848  when  he  left. 

To  disprove  these  statements  the  United  States  have  called  a 
large  number  of  witnesses. 

Samuel  Kyburz  testifies  that  he  resided  at  or  near  Sacramento 
from  October,  1846,  until  1848.  That  in  the  summer  of  1848,  one 
McDowell  settled  upon  the  land  opposite  the  city,  and  within  about 
a  mile  of  a  place  which  the  witness  had,  by  the  advice  of  Sutter, 
selected  for  himself.  That  McDowell  was  the  first  person  who 
settled  on  that  side  of  the  river  within  four  or  five  miles  of  Sutter's 
"  Embarcadero."  He  built  a  house  about  fifty  rods  from  the  bank 
of  the  river,  and  a  brush  fence  to  keep  his  mules  in.  He  had  his 
family  with  him,  who  still  live  there. 

On  being  asked  whether  Bellamy  ever  built  a  corral  and  put 
cattle  on  the  land,  the  witness  replies  that  he  never  saw  or  heard 
that  he  or  any  person  ever  did  so  before  McDowell ;  that  he  never 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  335 

Little  V.  United  States. 

saw  any  signs  of  a  settlement  previous  to  McDowell's,  nor  heard  of 
any. 

On  his  cross-examination  he  states  that  as  to  the  years  1844  and 
1845,  he  cannot  speak  positively  from  his  own  knowledge,  although 
he  is  satisfied  in  his  own  mind  on  the  subject,  but  that  from  1846 
he  is  sure  no  one  occupied  the  land,  and  there  were  no  cattle  on  it 
to  his  knowledge,  except  stray  cattle.  He  adds  that  at  that  time 
the  settlers  on  that  side  of  the  river  were  not  numerous — being 
only  two  within  thirty  miles — viz..  Swat  and  Hardy;  and  that 
Sutter  assisted  McDowell  to  mal^  his  settlement,  and  directed  the 
witness  to  send  two  ox-teams  to  haul  logs  for  the  house,  etc. 

Daniel  Leahy  testifies  that  he  resided  at  Sutter's  fort  from  Oc- 
tober, 1845,  until  April,  1847.  That  Juan  de  Swat  had  a  settle- 
ment on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  near  what  is  now  called 
Washington  City.  That  he  was  frequently  at  Swat's  place  up  to 
the  spring  of  1846.  That  there  was  no  other  settlement  at  that 
time  in  that  vicinity.  That  he  never  saw  a  corral  there  ;  if  there 
had  been  one,  he  could  not  have  helped  seeing  it ;  there  might 
have  been  some  cattle  on  the  plains — he  never  saw  them  near  the 
river.  That  the  first  settlement  after  Swat's  was  made  by  McDow- 
ell. He  never  heard  of  any  claim  or  settlement  by  Matthews,  Bel- 
lamy, Ridley  or  George  McDougal. 

David  T.  Bird  testifies  that  he  came  to  California  in  1844,  and 
has  resided  here  ever  since,  and  has  been  acquainted  with  the  land 
claimed  in  this  suit  ever  since  his  arrival.  In  1844  he  was  re- 
siding on  Cache  creek,  about  twenty  miles  above  Sutter's  fort,  and 
he  traveled  over  this  tract  on  his  way  to  the  fort,  and  returned  the 
next  day.  He  passed  through  or  over  the  tract  during  the  year 
1844  five  times,  which  he  remembers  distinctly,  and  perhaps  of- 
tener.  After  the  Micheltorena  war  and  about  May  1st,  1845,  he 
returned  to  Sutter's  fort,  and  continued  there  in  Sutter's  employ- 
ment until  1846,  and  between  these  dates  was  on  the  tract  ten  or 
twelve  times.  The  witness  then  states  that  during  all  this  time 
there  was  no  settlement  or  improvement  upon  the  land,  except  those 
of  Swat,  about  eight  miles  below.  That  he  thinks  he  can  assert 
positively  that  if  there  had  been  a  corral  on  the  land,  he  would 
have  seen  it. 


336  •         U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Little  V.  United  States. 

He  further  states  that  McDowell  was  the  first  person  who  settled 
on  the  land  within  eight  miles  of  where  Washington  now  stands. 
That  he  knew  Bellamy;  but  that  he  never  to  his  (witness')  knowl- 
edge built  a  corral  or  put  cattle  on  the  land ;  and  that  neither 
Ridley  or  McDougal  ever,  to  his  knowledge,  lived  there.  That 
the  Indian  who  attended  to  the  ferry,  established  as  the  witness 
understood  by  General  Sutter,  lived  on  the  Sacramento  side  of  the 
river,  and  transported  passengers  in  a  canoe,  and  this  mode  cf 
crossing  continued  until  1848.  The  witness  adds  that  he  has  fre- 
quently hunted  deer  and  trapped  on  the  tract  of  land  in  controversy. 

William  Gordon  testifies  that  he  settled  on  Cache  creek  in  1842, 
about  twenty-five  miles  up  the  river  from  Washington,  and  has 
lived  there  ever  since.  That  he  is  acquainted  with  the  settlements 
on  the  river  opposite  Sacramento  and  for  twenty  miles  up  and  down. 
The  first  settler  was  Swat,  who  settled  where  Washington  now  is. 
The  next  was  Knight,  who  settled  about  twenty-five  or  thirty  miles 
above  the  site  of  the  present  town  of  Washington  ;  and  the  next 
was  Hardy,  who  settled  in  1845,  about  eight  miles  below  Knight's 
place.  That  there  was  no  other  settlement  within  thirty  miles  of 
Washington  until  1847,  when  McDowell  made  a  settlement  under 
some  agreement  with  Swat,  as  witness  was  informed.  That  he  never 
knew  of  any  settlements  made  by  Matthews,  Bellamy,  Ridley  or 
McDougal,  between  the  years  1842  and  1847,  and  if  there  had 
been  any  he  should  have  seen  them.  That  he  heard  several  times 
during  that  time  of  Matthews  and  Bellamy  coming  to  look  for  land, 
but  never  heard  of  any  settlement  or  claim. 

Margaret  Taylor,  who  is  the  widow  of  James  McDowell,  testi- 
fies that  in  May,  1847,  her  former  husband  settled  on  the  land  at 
the  place  where  Washington  now  is,  under  an  agreement  with  Swat. 
That  Sutter  was  present  when  the  agreement  was  made,  and  as- 
sisted McDowell  to  build  his  house  by  furnishing  a  team  to  draw 
logs,  etc.,  and  that  at  the  time  of  this  settlement  there  was  no  im- 
provement whatever  in  that  vicinity,  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Sac- 
ramento ;  and  her  husband  continued  to  reside  in  the  same  place 
until  his  death  in  1849. 

Gilbert  A.  Grant  testifies  that  he  resided  in  1849  and  1850  on 
the  west  bank  of  the  Sacramento,  and  acted  as  agent  for  Sutter, 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  337 

Little  V.  United  States. 

and  had  opportunities  of  learning  what  lands  were  reputed  to  have 
been  granted.  That  he  never  heard  of  any  grant  having  been 
made  below  Hardy's  place,  and  that  he  heard  of  such  a  claim  for 
the  first  time  about  a  month  before  his  deposition  was  taken. 

Marcos  Vaca  testifies  that  he  has  lived  about  fifteen  miles  from 
Sutter's  fort  since  1843.  That  a  trail  led  from  his  rancho  to  the 
Embarcadero  of  Sutter's  fort,  and  that  he  frequently  visited 
McDowell's  house  and  the  embarcadero.  That  McDoAvell  made  his 
settlement  in  1847,  and  that  up  to  that  time  there  were  no  build- 
ings or  improvements  whatever  near  the  Embarcadero,  nor  does  he 
remember  any  on  or  near  the  road  from  his  rancho  to  the  Embar- 
cadero. He  further  states  that  he  never  heard  of  any  grant  or 
claim  concerning  the  land  near  the  Embarcadero  before  1847. 

George  T.  Wyman  testifies  that  he  resided  at  Sutter's  fort  from 
1841  to  1848,  and  was  engaged  in  hunting  and  taking  care  of 
stock  for  Captain  Sutter.  That  from  1844  to  1847  he  has  been  on 
the  land  adjacent  to  the  Embarcadero  so  often  that  it  is  impossible 
to  state  the  number  of  times.  That  McDowell  was  the  first  person 
who  settled  or  made  any  improvements  on  the  land.  That  he  has 
known  Bellamy  since  the  day  he  arrived,  and  that  during  the  years 
1844,  1845  and  1846  he  neither  built  a  corral  or  put  cattle  on  the 
tract  in  question  ;  that  if  he  had  done  so,  he  (witness)  would 
surely  have  known  it.  That  in  1846  there  was  no  corral  on  the 
north  side  of  the  trail  to  Vaca's  ranch  (as  stated  by  Major  Snyder, 
hereafter  alluded  to). 

That  he  saw  Bellamy  frequently,  and  that  from  1846  to  1849 
he  never  heard  him  set  up  any  claim  for  the  land  in  question,  or 
say  that  he  had  built  a  corral  or  placed  cattle  upon  it.  He  did  not 
however  see  Bellamy  oftener  than  once  a  month  during  the  period 
referred  to. 

Willard  Buzzle  testifies  that  he  resided  at  Sutter's  fort  from 
1841  until  1843  ;  that  he  returned  in  1844  and  remained  there 
until  1847.  That  he  was  on  the  tract  in  controversy  a  great  many 
times — on  an  average,  once  a  month.  That  McDowell  was  the  first 
person  who  settled  or  made  any  improvement  near  the  present  site 
of  Washington,  and  this  was  in  May  or  June  of  1847.  That  Bel- 
lamy did  not,  to  his  knowledge,  build  a  corral  or  place  cattle  on 


338  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


Little  V.  United  States. 


the  land,  between  the  years  1844  and  1847.  That  he  saw  him 
frequently,  being  an  old  acquaintance,  and  never  heard  him  set  up 
any  claim  to  the  land.  That  there  was  no  corral  near  the  river,  as 
testified  by  Major  Snyder,  except  a  brush  corral  which  he  (wit- 
ness) helped  to  build  for  the  purpose  of  catching  horses  after  cross- 
ing. This  was  built  in  1844,  and  in  the  fall  of  that  year  it  was 
fitted  up  again,  as  many  horses  were  brought  up.  That  Bellamy 
did  not  assist  and  was  not  present  when  it  was  made  or  repaired. 
It  was  burnt  in  1846,  after  which  another  was  erected  for  the  same 
purpose. 

Nathan  Coombs  testifies  that  from  1843  to  1847  he  resided  on 
Cache  creek,  about  twenty-five  miles  from  Sutter's  fort.  That  he 
was  frequently  at  the  fort,  and  that  on  his  way  he  passed  over  the 
tract  in  controversy.  That  the  first  person  who  made  any  settle- 
ment upon  it  was  McDowell,  whom  he  saw  there  in  1849.  That  he 
acted  as  guide  for  Major  Snyder  in  the  fall  of  1846,  from  Sonoma 
to  Sutter's  fort.  That  on  their  way  they  passed  along  the  trail 
from  Vaca's  rancho  to  the  Embarcadero ;  but  that  there  was  no 
corral  on  the  spot  spoken  of  by  Snyder,  that  he  (witness)  can 
recollect.  That  he  has  known  Bellamy  since  1843,  and  from  that 
year  until  1845  met  him  frequently ;  and  that  up  to  the  summer 
of  1848  he  knows  positively  that  Bellamy  did  not  take  possession  of 
the  tract,  build  a  corral,  or  place  cattle  upon  it.  That  a  corral  was 
built  of  brush  near  the  Embarcadero,  which  was  used  by  various 
persons  when  crossing  their  stock  ;  and  that  he  never  heard  of  the 
claim  of  Bellamy  and  Matthews  until  within  a  few  weeks. 

To  the  foregoing  testimony  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  may 
be  added  that  of  John  Bidwell  and  Samuel  J.  Hensley,  witnesses 
on  behalf  of  the  claimant. 

These  witnesses  state  that  McDowell  was  the  first  person  who 
settled  or  made  any  improvements  opposite  Sacramento  city,  at  the 
place  now  called  Washington. 

On  the  part  of  the  claimant,  the  only  witnesses  who  corroborate 
the  testimony  of  Bellamy  are  Major  J.  R.  Snyder  and  Joseph 
Swan  son. 

Major  Snyder  testifies  that  in  the  fall  of  1846  he  saw  a  corral  on 
the  land  opposite  Sutter's  Embarcadero,  and  about  one  hundred  and 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  339 

Little  y.  United  States. 

fifty  or  two  hundred  yards  back  from  the  river.  It  was  about  fifteen 
or  twenty  yards  to  the  north  of  the  trail  commonly  traveled  in  going 
from  Sutter's  fort  to  Sonoma.  He  was  accompanied  at  the  time  by 
Coombs  as  guide.  The  corral  was  readily  seen  from  the  trail.  It 
had  in  it  some  horses,  which  the  witness  supposed  to  belong  to  some 
trappers  who  were  camping  on  the  river.  He  afterwards  passed 
along  the  same  trail,  about  July,  1848,  when  he  again  observed  a 
corral  near  the  same  place,  but  whether  the  same  one  or  not  he 
cannot  state.  He  did  not  observe,  however,  on  either  occasion, 
the  house  of  McDowell.  The  witness  also  states  that  when  he 
crossed  the  river  in  1846  there  was  no  regular  ferry.  There  were 
Indians  w^ho  crossed  people  over. 

Joseph  Swanson  testifies  that  he  passed  over  the  tract  in  1844. 
There  was  then  a  corral  there,  about  one  hundred  to  three  hundred 
yards  from  the  river,  a  little  above  the  Embarcadero.  He  is  unable 
to  state  its  size  or  mode  of  construction,  except  that  its  shape  was 
square  or  oblong. 

From  the  foregoing  abstract  of  the  testimony  with  regard  to  the 
occupation  of  the  land,  it  is  apparent  that  in  every  particular,  ex- 
cept one,  Bellamy's  statements  are  not  only  not  corroborated,  but 
disproved.  It  is  impossible  to  believe,  under  the  evidence,  that 
Bellamy  was  put  into  possession  of  the  land  by  Sutter  ;  that  he 
placed  cattle  upon  it ;  that  Ridley  took  possession  of  it  and  es- 
tablished a  ferry  across  the  river,  or  that  McDougal  took  possession 
and  remained  there  until  1848,  as  stated  by  Bellamy.  Circum- 
stances such  as  these  could  not  have  been  unknown  to  the  numerous 
witnesses  who  resided  in  the  immediate  vicinity.  To  suppose  them 
to  have  occurred  Ave  must,  on  the  faith  of  Bellamy's  unsupported 
declarations,  attribute  to  them  misstatements  which  it  is  difficult  to 
believe  not  to  have  been  willful. 

On  one  point,  Bellamy's  evidence  is  in  a  slight  degree  corrob- 
orated by  the  testimony  of  Major  Snyder  and  Swanson.  But 
these  witnesses  only  testify  to  the  existence  of  a  corral,  the  object 
of  which  is  explained  by  other  witnesses,  and  with  the  construction 
of  which  Bellamy  was  wholly  unconnected.  I  think  that  the  pre- 
ponderance of  testimony  is  clearly  and  decisively  against  the  truth 
of  the  statements  of  Bellamy. 


340  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Little  V.  Uuited  States. 

It  is  urged  that  his  testimony  is  inadmissible  on  the  ground  of 
interest.  Whatever  force  there  might  have  been  in  that  objection, 
it  was  not  made  in  season.  He  was  examined  and  cross-examined 
without  objection.  In  estimating  his  credibility  however,  it  ought 
not  to  be  lost  sight  of. 

Bellamy's  character  has  since  been  impeached  by  the  testimony 
of  several  witnesses,  and  sustained  by  that  of  some  others  of  great 
respectability.  If  the  proofs  were  more  nicely  balanced,  an  in- 
quiry into  his  general  character  might  be  necessary.  But  where 
the  preponderance  of  evidence  is  decisive,  the  result  of  such  an  in- 
quiry could  have  but  little  weight. 

If  then  we  reject  the  testimony  of  Bellamy  with  regard  to  the 
occupation  of  the  rancho  as  untrue,  his  statement  that  Sutter  signed 
his  report  in  his  presence  cannot  be  received  without  extreme  dis- 
trust. 

We  have  seen  that  Bellamy  states  the  body  of  that  report  to 
have  been  written  by  Mr.  Bidwell  or  Major  Reading.  This  state- 
ment is  admitted  to  be  a  mistake. 

We  have  also  seen  that  one  document  at  least  in  this  case  was 
written  by  General  Sutter,  long  since  the  conquest,  and  antedated. 
This  fact  is  of  itself  sufficient  to  impair,  if  not  wholly  destroy  the 
presumption  that  might  otherwise  arise,  that  the  report  of  Sutter 
was  made  at  the  time  it  bears  date.  This  presumption  and  the 
testimony  of  Bellamy  constitute  the  only  evidence  on  the  part  of 
the  claimant  to  show  the  time  when  the  report  of  Sutter  was  made. 

No  other  witness  is  produced  by  whom  the  petition  and  report  of 
Sutter  were  seen  prior  to  1850. 

The  claimant  himself,  at  the  time  of  filing  his  petition  to  the 
Board,  seems  to  have  been  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  his  title,  for 
he  speaks  of  it  in  general  terms  as  a  grant  by  Micheltorena  to 
Josefa  Martinez,  and  states  that  "  he  has  been  unable  to  ohid\n  ]jos- 
session  of  the  said  graiit,  but  that  Josefa  Martinez  withholds  it 
from  him."  Certainly,  he  does  not  here  refer  to  the  general  title, 
which  is  the  only  grant  exhibited  in  this  case. 

That  the  papers  now  presented  were  in  existence  in  1850,  may  be 
admitted.  That  fact  is  proved  by  Bassham  and  by  Mr.  Schleiden, 
who  translated  them  at  that  time. 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  341 

Little  V.  United  States. 

But  the  point  to  be  established  is,  that  Sutter  had  made  a  favor- 
able report  previously  to  the  date  of  the  general  title. 

The  existence  of  such  a  report  in  1850  no  more  proves  this  es- 
sential fact,  than  its  existence  and  production  to  this  Court  in  1856. 

Mr.  Bassham,  the  friend  of  Bellamy,  who  produces  these  papers, 
swears  that  he  received  them  from  Josefa  Martinez,  or  Matthews, 
her  husband,  in  1850  ;  and  that  one  of  them  stated  that  the  papers, 
together  with  the  grant,  had  been  on  deposit  with  some  friend,  but 
that  the  grant  was  lost — whether  before  or  after  the  papers  were 
returned,  the  witness  does  not  remember. 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  Avitness  does  not  state  that  the 
papers  are  now  in  the  same  condition  as  when  received  by  him.  I 
do  not  attach  much  importance,  however,  to  this  circumstance,  as 
the  inquiry  might  have  been  accidentally  omitted. 

But  his  statement  with  regard  to  what  Josefa  Martinez  or  her 
husband  told  him  respecting  the  grant,  deserves  more  attention. 

They  could  hardly  have  referred  to  a  copy  of  the  general  title, 
for  we  have  already  seen  that  the  copy  now  produced,  with  the  cer- 
tificate of  Sutter,  has  been  recently  obtained.  If  they  referred  to 
a  grant  directly  to  Josefa  Martinez,  such  as  the  claimant  evidently 
supposed  to  exist  when  he  presented  his  petition  to  the  Board,  it  is 
clear  that  they  did  not  claim  under  the  general  title  of  Miphelto- 
rena — which  is  now  set  up  as  their  original  title.  I  have  referred 
to  these  alleged  declarations  because  they  were  put  in  evidence  by 
the  claimant,  and  because  they  seem  to  show  that  neither  Bassham 
when  he  obtained  the  papers,  nor  Josefa  Martinez  when  she  de- 
livered them,  had  any  idea  of  asserting  any  rights  founded  on  a 
petition,  a  favorable  informe  of  Sutter,  and  the  general  title  of 
Micheltorena. 

According  to  Bellamy's  account,  the  petition,  after  Sutter's  re- 
port was  obtained,  was  returned  to  Micheltorena.  It  is  not  ex- 
plained how  or  when  it  subsequently  passed  into  the  hands  of  the 
petitioner. 

Bellamy  also  states  that  upon  receiving  Micheltorena's  assurance 
that  the  grant  would  be  issued,  he  was  put  into  possession  by  Gen- 
eral Sutter.    This  statement  is  scarcel}''  credible  for  several  reasons : 

1st.  The  order  of  Jimeno  directed  a  reference  to  the  Alcalde  o 


342  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Little  V.  United  States. 

San  Jose,  as  well  as  to  Sutter.  It  does  not  appear  why  a  com- 
pliance with  that  order  was  dispensed  with.  The  report  of  Sutter 
merely  certifies  the  land  to  be  vacant.  Information  would  naturally 
be  desired  by  the  Governor  as  to  the  qualifications  of  the  petitioner, 
etc.,  as  required  by  the  regulations  of  1828. 

2d.  If  Bellamy  means  to  say  that  he  was  put  into  possession  by 
Sutter  immediately  after  the  return  of  the  petition  to  Micheltorena, 
then  Sutter  acted  wholly  without  authority,  for  not  only  no  grant 
had  been  issued,  but  the  informes  required  had  not  been  obtained. 
If  he  means  to  say  that  he  was  put  in  possession  after  the  general 
title  had  been  issued,  it  is  extraordinary  that  neither  he  nor  the 
grantee  or  her  husband  applied  to  Sutter  for  a  copy  of  the  general 
title.  That  he  did  not,  may  be  clearly  inferred  from  his  silence  on 
the  point.  That  the  copy  now  produced  has  been  recently  pre- 
pared, has  already  been  shown. 

3d.  The  land  in  question  was  not  within  Sutter's  jurisdiction,  but 
belonged  to  that  of  the  Alcalde  of  Sonoma.  It  is  highly  improbable 
that  Sutter  would  have  attempted  to  exercise  such  a  function  as 
that  of  putting  a  grantee  in  possession  of  land  beyond  the  limits  of 
his  own  jurisdiction. 

4th.  If  these  facts  had  occurred,  Sutter  would  certainly  have 
remembered  them.  He  has  not  been  examined.  On  this  point,  as 
well  as  on  that  relating  to  the  time  when  he  wrote  the  report,  the 
omission  to  examine  him  on  the  part  of  the  claimant  is  a  pregnant 
circumstance  against  him. 

After  a  most  careful  consideration,  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  testimony  of  Bellamy  is  not  worthy  of  credit.  The  alleged 
occupation  of  the  rancho  by  him,  and  the  building  of  the  corral,  are 
disproved  by  such  a  mass  of  testimony  as  to  leave  no  room  for  doubt 
on  the  subject. 

His  statement  that  Ridley  first,  and  afterwards  McDougal,  took 
possession  of  and  remained  on  the  rancho  until  1848,  and  that  the 
former  established  a  ferry,  is  disproved  by  the  testimony  of  every 
other  witness  examined  on  the  subject — including  those  produced 
by  the  claimant.  No  one  of  them  ever  saw  or  heard  of  these  per- 
sons hving  on  the  land,  nor  was  their  house  or  other  trace  of  occu- 
pation observed  by  any  one  —  the  corral  seen  by  Major  Snyder 


DECEMBER  TERM,  1857.  343 

Little  V.  United  States. 

being  shown  not  to  have  been  built  bj  them,  or  to  have  been  used 
for  purposes  connected  with  the  settlement  of  the  tract. 

Under  all  these  circumstances,  the  testimony  of  Bellamy  with 
regard  to  the  time  when  Sutter  signed  his  report  cannot  be  re- 
garded as  sufficient  evidence  of  the  fact ;  especially,  when  the  tes- 
timony of  Sutter  himself  is  withheld. 

The  proof,  then,  of  the  date  of  this  report  is  thus  found  to  consist 
solely  in  the  facts  that  the  instrument  has  a  date  attached  to  it,  and 
that  it  existed  in  1850.  But  the  presumption  arising  from  the  date 
that  it  was  executed  on  that  day,  at  all  times  weak,  and  indulged 
only  in  the  absence  of  suspicious  circumstances,  is  destroyed  when 
we  find  in  the  same  case  a  similar  paper,  executed  by  the  same 
party,  clearly  antedated  ;  and  where  the  party  who  might  have 
testified  as  to  the  time  when  he  executed  it  is  within  reach,  but  is 
not  examined. 

If  these  observations  be  just,  the  claimant  has  entirely  failed  to 
establish  by  evidence  that  can  be  deemed  satisfactory  the  essential 
fact,  that  at  the  date  of  the  general  title  Josefa  Martinez  was  one 
of  those  who  had  previously  solicited  lands,  and  obtained  a  favorable 
report  from  Sutter. 

But  the  claimant's  counsel  rely  with  apparent  confidence  on  the 
testimony  of  Bidwell  and  Larkin,  with  reference  to  the  map  made 
by  the  former. 

Mr.  Bidwell  testifies  that,  by  the  request  of  Governor  Michel- 
torena,  he  made,  in  the  fall  of  1844,  a  map  of  the  Sacramento 
valley.  This  map  is  not  produced,  but  another  is  shown  to  the 
witness,  which  he  recognizes  as  a  copy  of  the  original  '^  in  its  gen- 
eral features. '^^  On  this  map  the  tract  claimed  in  this  case  is  laid 
down,  and  marked  "  Rancho  de  Bellamy."  When  cross-examined, 
the  witness  states  that  he  is  unable  to  say  from  what  source  he  de- 
rived the  information  according  to  which  he  made  his  map.  "  That 
he  does  not  remember  to  have  seen  the  papers  of  Bellamy  before 
they  were  shown  him  in  Court ;  that  it  was  a  matter  of  general  no- 
toriety that  Bellamy  was  trying  to  get  a  grant  of  land  there." 

Thomas  0.  Larkin  testifies  that  his  impression  is  that  Bidwell 
made  two  maps  from  memory  in  Monterey.  One  he  gave  to  the 
witness,  the  other  to  Micheltorena.     The  former  continued  in  his 


344  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Little  V.  United  States. 

possession  until  it  was  produced  before  the  Board  in  evidence,  and 
it  has  since  remained  on  file  in  the  Surveyor  General's  office.  A 
traced  copy  of  this  map  is  exhibited. 

I  have  not  been  able  to  attribute  to  this  testimony  the  force  as- 
signed to  it  by  the  counsel.  Assuming  that  the  map  produced  is 
an  exact  copy  of  that  made  by  Bidwell  in  1844,  it  merely  shows 
that  at  that  time  he  supposed  this  tract  to  be  "  the  Rancho  de  Bel- 
lamy." Had  he  made  the  same  statement  orally  or  by  letter,  it 
would  hardly  be  received  as  proof  that  Bellamy  had  obtained  a 
grant  for  it.  But  the  maker  of  the  map  is  himself  produced  and 
disclaims  all  knowledge  on  the  subject.  That  he  did  not  derive  his 
information  on  the  subject  from  the  archives  is  evident,  for  the  ar- 
chives contain  no  information  respecting  it.  That  he  did  not  see 
the  original  documents  is  clear  from  his  own  admission,  and  from 
the  fact  that  the  application  was  made  by,  and  the  title,  if  any,  was 
in  favor  of  Josefa  Martinez,  and  not  of  Bellamy.  He  himself  suffi- 
ciently accounts  for  the  designation  of  this  tract  on  the  map  as  the 
"  Rancho  de  Bellamy,"  by  his  statement  that  "  it  was  notorious 
that  Bellamy  was  trying  to  get  a  grant  for  it."  It  was  in  all  prob- 
ability this  fact  which  led  him  to  mark  the  land  on  his  map  as  Bel- 
lamy's rancho. 

The  map  may  perhaps  be  regarded  as  proof  that  at  that  time 
Bellamy,  or  Josefa  Martinez  and  her  husband,  with  whom  he  was 
interested,  were  petitioning  for  the  land  ;  and  I  do  not  understand 
that  fact  to  be  questioned.  But  it  does  not  prove  that  they  ever 
received  a  grant,  or  that  Sutter's  favorable  report  had  been  ob- 
tained before  the  general  title  issued. 

To  the  unsworn  declaration  of  Bidwell,  as  expressed  by  the  map, 
that  this  tract  was  the  rancho  of  Bellamy,  may  not  unfairly  be  op- 
posed the  declarations  of  Sutter,  made  subsequently,  that  the  land 
was  vacant  and  ungranted,  and  his  advice  and  assistance  to  McDow- 
ell to  settle  on  it  as  such  ;  as  also  the  statement  of  Grant  and  other 
witnesses,  who  swore  that  they  never  heard  of  his  claim. 

On  the  whole,  I  consider  that  the  claimant  has  failed  to  establish 
by  satisfactory  proofs  that  his  assignor  was  one  of  the  class  in  whose 
favor  the  general  title  issued,  and  that  on  this  ground  the  claim 
should  be  rejected. 


JUNE  TERM,  1857.  345 

Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

But  if  this  were  less  clear,  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  neglect  to 
occupy,  or  to  render  to  the  former  government  any  of  the  consid- 
erations upon  which  the  grant  was  made,  if  at  all,  establishes  as  a 
matter  of  fact  and  of  law  that  she  had  abandoned  all  claim  to  the 
land  before  the  change  of  sovereignty.  That  she  never  settled 
upon  it,  inhabited  it,  nor  ever  built  a  corral  upon  it,  nor  did  any 
one  else  in  her  behalf,  has  been  shown.  That  all  the  neighbors, 
including  Sutter  himself,  regarded  it  as  vacant  up  to  the  time  of 
McDowell's  settlement,  is  abundantly  proved ;  and  the  omission  to 
obtain  a  copy  of  the  general  title  indicates  that  the  claim  was  prob- 
ably abandoned  as  worthless,  if  it  does  not  justify  the  inference  to 
which  the  failure  of  proofs  has  conducted  us,  that  she  was  not  one 
of  the  class  in  whose  favor  it  issued. 

In  examining  this  case,  I  have  sought  to  confine  myself  to  the 
proofs  which  I  consider  legally  admissible. 

Upon  a  full  consideration,  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  claim  ought 
not  to  be  confirmed. 


JUAN  M.  LUCO  AND  JOSE  LEANDRO  LUCO,  claiming  the 
Rancho  Ulpines,  Appellants,  vs.  THE  UNITED  STATES. 

The  claim  rejected  on  the  ground  that  the  alleged  grant  is  fraudulent  and  ante- 
dated. 

Claim  for  a  tract  of  land,  quantity  unknown,  in  Solano  county, 
rejected  by  the  Board,  and  appealed  by  the  claimants. 

Calhoun  Benham,  for  Appellants. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  for  Appellees. 

The  claim  in  this  case  is  for  a  tract  of  land  of  from  thirty  to  fifty 
square  leagues  in  extent,  constituting  a  sobrante,  or  surplus,  between 
various  ranches  mentioned  in  the  title.  It  was  rejected  by  the  Board 
as  spurious.  The  testimony  is  very  voluminous.  I  have  considered 
it  with  the  attention  due  to  its  importance. 


346  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 


The  claimants  have  offered  in  evidence  a  paper  purporting  to  be 
the  original  petition  of  Jose  de  la  Rosa  to  the  Governor,  dated 
October  18th,  1845,  with  a  marginal  decree  of  the  latter,  dated 
November  8th,  1845.  Also  the  original  grant,  signed  by  Pio  Pico, 
Jose  Ma.  Covarrubias,  Secretary,  dated  December  4th,  1845,  with 
a  certificate  of  approval  by  the  Assembly,  signed  by  the  same  per- 
sons, and  dated  December  18th,  1845. 

These  papers  are  not  produced  from  the  archives  of  the  former 
government,  but  were  deposited  in  the  Surveyor  General's  ojBSce  on 
the  twenty-fifth  of  October,  1853,  by  the  claimants. 

No  claim  was  presented  to  the  Board  within  the  time  limited  by 
the  Act  of  1851.  An  application  was  therefore  made  to  Congress, 
and  a  special  act  was  passed  July  17th,  1854,  authorizing  the  pre- 
sentation of  the  claim.  This  application  was  based  upon  the  affi- 
davits of  Pio  Pico  and  Jose  Maria  Covarrubias,  which  will  here- 
after be  noticed. 

It  is  contended,  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  that  all  the 
papers  in  the  case  are  spurious,  and  were  fabricated  long  after  the 
conquest  of  the  country. 

In  deciding  upon  the  genuineness  of  any  title  alleged  to  have 
been  derived  from  the  former  government,  the  most  satisfactory 
evidence  which  can  be  offered  to  the  Court  is  that  derived  from  the 
archives,  and  that  afforded  by  a  notorious  occupation,  and  a  claim 
of  ownership  recognized  and  acquiesced  in,  if  not  by  the  public 
authorities,  at  least  by  the  neighbors  and  adjoining  proprietors  of 
the  alleged  grantee. 

In  the  case  at  bar,  the  archives  show  no  trace  whatever  of  the 
existence  of  the  grant.  The  petition  and  marginal  decree  are  pre- 
sented by  the  claimants  from  their  own  custody.  No  proofs  are 
offered  to  explain  why  the  claim  was  not  sooner  presented  to  the 
Board,  nor  where  or  in  whose  custody  the  documents  have  been 
since  their  alleged  dehvery  to  the  grantee.  The  affidavits  on  which 
the  application  to  Congress  was  founded  were  made  in  May  and 
June,  1853.  It  is  clear  that  neither  to  Pico  nor  Covarrubias  was 
the  original  petition  presented.  In  his  deposition,  taken  before  the 
Board,  Covarrubias  states  that  all  the  documents  presented  to  him, 
when  he  made  his  affidavit,  are,  he  believes,  referred  to  in  the 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  347 


Lixco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 


affidavit ;  and  that  as  well  as  he  can  recollect,  all  the  documents 
about  which  he  w^as  then  testifying  were  presented  to  him.  He  is 
not  very  positive,  however.  He  remembers  that  the  expediente 
was  shown  him. 

Had  the  witness  before  testifying  adverted  to  the  affidavit  itself, 
he  would  have  seen  that  he  therein  swears  that,  "  he  (De  la  Rosa) 
presented  a  written  petition  for  said  grant  of  land,  but  the  affiant 
does  not  know  ivhere  said  petition  noiv  is.  The  practice  with  the 
office  was  to  return  the  petition  with  the  grant." 

It  will  hardly  be  contended  that  the  petition  was  before  Covar- 
rubias  when  he  made  this  affidavit. 

The  affidavit  of  Pico  refers  exclusively  to  the  "  original  document 
hereunto  annexed,  bearing  date  December  4th,  1845  " — which  was 
the  grant. 

Mr.  Haight,  who  was  consulted  by  the  claimants  as  counsel,  tes- 
tifies that  he  saw,  in  1853,  the  original  document,  that  is,  the  grant ; 
but  is  not  positive  as  to  the  others,  and  that  "  the  claimants  repre- 
sented to  him  that  there  were  other  papers  in  Mexico,  which  they 
would  endeavor  to  get." 

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  so  late  as  the  beginning  of  1853  the 
petition  had  not  been  brought  to  light. 

It  is  also  obvious,  from  the  tenor  of  the  affidavits  of  Pico  and 
Covarrubias,  that  the  certificate  of  approval  by  the  Assembly  was 
not  exhibited  to  them  when  their  affidavits  were  taken.  The  affida- 
vit of  Covarrubias  refers  exclusivefy  to  the  grant.  Neither  Mr. 
Haight  nor  Mr.  Hawes  pretend  to  have  seen  the  certificate.  It  is 
produced  for  the  first  time  in  October,  1853,  when  it  was  deposited 
in  the  Surveyor  General's  office. 

No  explanation  whatever  of  those  circumstances  is  offered  by  the 
claimants,  nor  has  any  attempt  been  made  to  show  how  it  happened 
that  the  petition  and  certificate  became  separated  from  the  grant ; 
how  they,  or  at  least  the  former, found  its  way  to  Mexico;  in  whose 
custody  they  were  found,  and  when,  and  from  whom  and  under 
what  circumstances  the  person  in  possession  of  them  procured  them. 

M.  G.  Vallejo,  one  of  the  principal  witnesses  relied  on  by  the 
claimants,  testifies  that  in  the  month  of  December,  1845,  he  re- 
ceived from  the  Governor,  by  a  courier,  the  grant,  which  he  de- 
23 


348  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 


livered  to  Rosa.  It  was  in  an  envelope  which  the  latter  opened, 
and  the  witness  saw  and  read  it. 

In  reply  to  the  sixth  cross-interrogatory,  he  states  that  the  grant 
was  the  only  paper  received  by  him,  and  that  he  did  not  see  the 
others.  He  also  states  that  he  never  saw  the  certificate  of  ap- 
proval, until  he  saw  it  in  the  Surveyor  General's  office  ;  that  he 
saw  the  petition  when  Rosa  drew  it,  but  that  he  does  not  know  that 
Rosa  had  the  petition  after  he  received  the  grant. 

To  the  twenty-second  cross-interrogatory,  he  replies  that  he 
never  saw  the  petition  and  approval  attached  together  until  he  saw 
them  in  the  Surveyor  General's  office. 

Jose  de  la  Rosa,  the  grantee,  testifies  that  he  drew  the  petition 
in  1845,  and  that  in  the  latter  part  of  that  year  he  received  it  back 
again  witJi  the  title.  That  the  title  was  delivered  to  him  by  M.  G. 
Vallejo  in  December,  1845,  and  that  the  certificate  of  approval 
was  delivered  to  him  hy  Vallejo  subsequently^  in  the  year  1846 — 
in  January  or  February  of  that  year. 

The  credibility  of  the  testimony  of  either  of  these  witnesses  will 
be  considered  hereafter.  It  is  sufficient  at  present  to  say  that 
neither  pretends  to  account  for  the  papers  after  their  alleged  re- 
ception by  Rosa  in  1845  and  1846.  No  inquiry  was  made  of  the 
latter  as  to  whether  he  retained  them  in  his  custody ;  why  he  did 
not  while  the  property  remained  his — that  is,  up  to  March  18th, 
1853 — present  his  claim  to  the  Board ;  whether  at  the  time  of  the 
transfer  he  delivered  the  papers  to  the  present  claimants,  or  if  not — 
whether  as  stated  by  them  to  their  counsel,  Mr.  Haight,  about  the 
same  time — they  were  then  in  Mexico,  and  if  so  in  whose  custody, 
and  for  what  reason  sent. 

In  a  case  where  the  chief  inquiry  is  whether  the  papers  be  gen- 
uine, information  on  these  points  ought  not  to  bo  withheld. 

We  have  seen  that  Jose  Maria  Covarrubias,  in  his  affidavit  in 
1853,  states  it  to  have  been  "  the  practice  with  the  office  to  return 
the  petition  with  the  grant." 

This  extraordinary  statement  is  not  only  disproved  by  the  noto- 
rious fact  that  the  expedientes  containing  the  petition,  informes, 
orders  and  concession,  were  usually  retained  in  the  archives  where 
they  are  now  found — the  grant  or  titulo  being  the  only  document 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  349 

Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

delivered  to  the  party — but  it  is  contradicted  by  the  evidence  of  M. 
G.  Vallejo,  and  by  the  testimony  of  Covarrubias  himself.  In  his 
answer  to  the  sixty-second  cross-interrogatory  he  says  :  "  The  pe- 
titions and  the  balance  of  the  expedientes  were  archived  in  the 
archives  of  the  government.  This  was  the  general  practice  before, 
zvhile,  and  after  Itvas  Secretary J^^ 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  sense  of  the  necessity  of  accounting 
for  the  absence  of  the  petition  from  the  archives,  which  may  have 
suggested  the  statement  of  Covarrubias  in  his  affidavit,  did  not  lead 
the  claimants  then  or  since  to  offer  a  more  satisfactory  explanation 
of  the  circumstance. 

The  claimants  can  thus  derive  no  aid  to  their  documents  from  any 
presumptions  of  genuineness  which  might  have  arisen  from  their 
production  from  the  proper  custody.  On  the  contrary,  they  are 
iable  to  the  suspicions  which  their  long  delay  in  presenting  them, 
and  their  entire  failure  to  explain  circumstances  so  clearly  requiring 
and  so  easily  admitting  of  explanation  (if  the  papers  are  genuine) 
naturally  excite. 

Evidence  has  been  offered  to  show  an  occupation  by  Eosa  of  the 
land  said  to  have  been  granted  to  him. 

The  witnesses  on  this  point  are  Alvarado,  Victor  Prudon,  Mesa, 
Salvador,  Vallejo,  Carillo,  Juarez  and  Ortega. 

Alvarado  swears  that  in  1849,  Rosa  told  him  in  San  Francisco, 
that  he  was  occupying  a  rancho  near  Sonoma. 

Victor  Prudon  testifies  that  in  1840  he  knew  Rosa  to  be  in  the 
occupation  of  a  rancho  called  Julpines  ;  that  he  had  a  house  and 
corral  on  it,  and  that  he  remained  there  until  1846.  The  witness, 
on  his  cross-examination,  admits  that  he  never  was  on  the  rancho  ; 
that  he  knew  of  Rosa's  occupation  "  from  General  Vallejo  and  com- 
mon report,"  and  from  his  sending  goods  to  the  place  by  Rosa's 
order,  or  that  of  his  mayor  domo. 

Mesa  testifies  that  he  knew  Rosa  to  be  living  on  and  occupying 
a  rancho  in  Solano  county,  long  before  the  Americans  came  to  the 
couQtry  ;  that  he  had  an  adobe  house  on  the  place,  in  which  he 
lived  with  his  family.  He  had  a  corral  and  horses,  and  some  cul- 
tivation. That  he  visited  Rosa  at  his  house  while  he  lived  there. 
That  he  saw  Rosa  building  the  house,  and  that  the  cultivation  was 
about  one  hundred  varas  square. 


350  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

Salvador  Vallejo  swears  that  he  knows  Rosa  has  occupied  the 
place  ever  since  he  obtained  the  grant — that  is,  in  1845  or  1846. 
That  he  had  a  house  and  corral,  horses  and  cattle  there,  and  a  por- 
tion of  the  land  inclosed  and  cultivated.  That  Rosa  hved  there 
with  his  family,  but  at  times  during  the  period  he  has  resided  at 
Napa,  Sonoma  and  Monterey. 

On  cross-examination  he  states  that  he  knows  Rosa  has  continued 
to  occupy  the  land,  for  it  is  on  the  road  to  Sacramento,  and  he,  the 
witness,  has  frequently  seen  it  in  passing  that  way. 

Jose  Ramon  Carillo  testifies  that  he  has  frequently  stopped  at 
Rosa's  house  on  the  Rancho  of  Ulpines  ;  that  Rosa  was  living  there 
with  his  family  ;  that  he  had  horses  and  cattle  on  it,  and  had 
erected  a  corral.  The  house  was  an  adobe.  That  Rosa  was  still 
on  the  place  when  he  (witness)  left  Sonoma  two  or  three  years 
after  the  Bear  Flag  war— that  is,  1848  or  1849. 

Cayetano  Juarez  testifies  that  he  was  in  Rosa's  house  on  the 
rancho  in  1845  ;  that  it  was  built  of  poles,  covered  with  board  and 
tules  ;  that  it  was  near  an  estuary  of  the  river  ;  that  it  could  not 
possibly  have  been  seen  from  the  road  to  Sacramento,  it  being 
eight  or  ten  leagues  distant ;  that  there  were  eight  or  ten  acres 
cultivated  in  wheat ;  that  the  house  was  situated  about  eight 
leagues  from  the  road  running  from  Sonoma  to  Sacramento  ;  that 
on  one  occasion  he  lent  him  horses  and  carts  to  take  his  family  to 
the  rancho  ;  that  he  had  lent  him  horses  on  several  occasions  ;  that 
the  cultivated  land  was  not  fenced,  but  appeared  to  have  been 
plowed. 

Ortega  swears  that  in  1838  he  saw  on  the  land  a  house,  built  of 
poles  and  plastered  with  mud  ;  that  it  was  situated  on  the  right 
hand  side  of  the  road  as  you  go  from  Sonoma  to  Sacramento,  about 
seventy  varas  from  the  estero ;  that  he  stopped  there  on  his  way  to 
Sacramento,  and  that  he  saw  the  house  from  the  traveled  path  be- 
fore he  turned  off  to  go  to  it.  There  was  no  wagon  road  to  it,  but 
numerous  paths  made  by  cattle  and  elk. 

Jose  de  la  Rosa,  the  grantee,  testifies  that  he  occupied  the  land  ; 
that  he  kept  his  wild  horses  upon  it  during  the  year  1846 ;  that 
they  were  three  or  four  hundred  in  number,  and  marked  with  his 
brand,  of  which  he  gives  a  rough  drawing.    The  tame  horses,  about 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  351 


Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 


fifty  in  number,  he  kept  at  Sonoma.  That  in  1845  and  1846,  he 
frequently  visited  his  ranch  with  his  family ;  but  "  he  always  went 
with  his  own  horses — he  never  had  horses  belonging  to  any  one 
else.'^ 

Salvador  Vallejo  testifies,  in  a  second  deposition,  that  he  con- 
veyed De  la  Rosa  in  his  launch  the  first  time  he  went  to  occupy 
Ulpines.  That  a  house  was  built  under  his  and  witness'  directions, 
and  was  built  of  poles  and  mud,  and  roofed  with  boards.  That  a 
piece  of  land  was  inclosed  and  cultivated  there,  and  that  the  cattle 
on  the  rancho  were  owned  by  Rosa,  but  branded  with  the  mark  of 
M.  G.  Vallejo. 

M.  G.  Vallejo  states,  in  a  general  way,  that  he  knows  that  De 
la  Rosa  occupied  the  rancho.  He  admits,  however,  that  he  never 
was  on  it  after  Rosa  received  his  grant. 

The  foregoing  comprises  all  the  testimony  adduced  by  the  claim- 
ants to  prove  occupation  by  De  la  Rosa  of  the  land. 

It  is  apparent  that  the  witnesses  contradict  each  other  on  several 
material  points.  As  to  the  extent  of  the  cultivation,  as  to  whether 
or  not  it  was  fenced,  as  to  the  material  of  which  the  house  was  com- 
posed, as  to  the  brand  upon  the  cattle,  and  especially  as  to  the  sit- 
uation of  the  house,  whether  it  was  near  to  and  visible  from  the 
road,  or  eight  or  ten  leagues  distant.  The  statement  of  one  of  the 
witnesses  that  he  frequently  lent  horses  and  carts  to  De  la  Rosa  is 
inconsistent  with  the  declaration  of  the  latter  that  he  always  used 
his  own  horses  in  going  to  his  rancho,  while  the  frequent  voyages 
in  the  launch,  as  described  by  Vallejo,  seem  wholly  to  have  escaped 
the  recollection  of  De  la  Rosa. 

It  is  unnecessary,  however,  to  dwell  on  these  contradictions,  for 
the  alleged  occupation  by  Rosa  of  the  land  has  been  disproved  by 
what  I  cannot  but  consider  a  clear  preponderance  of  testimony. 

It  is  in  evidence  that  up  to  1853,  the  lands  were  treated  by  the 
United  States  as  pubhc  lands,  and  surveyed  as  such.  Felipe  Pefia, 
one  of  the  original  grantees  of  the  adjoining  rancho  of  Los  Putos 

h  Baca,  states  that  Rosa  never  built  a  house  upon  or  oc- 
cupied the  rancho  ;  that  he  is  acquainted  with  the  rancheros  in 
that  region,  and  never  knew  Rosa  to  be  the  proprietor  or  owner  of 
any  land. 


352  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

Demetrio  Pena  makes  the  same  statement. 

John  Bidwell,  the  original  grantee  of  "  EUchama,"  and  who  was 
acquainted  with  all  the  rancheros  in  that  part  of  the  country,  states 
that  the  premises  claimed  in  this  case  were  never  occupied  or  cul- 
tivated bj  any  one  to  his  knowledge,  and  that  had  De  la  Rosa 
lived  on  the  rancho  he  thinks  he  should  have  known  it. 

Jos^  S.  Berreyesa,  who  was  Alcalde  of  Sonoma  in  1846,  states  that 
he  was  asked  by  Don  Agustin  Bernal  if  he  would  report  favorably 
to  his  (Bernal's)  petition  for  the  land,  whether  it  was  vacant  and 
could  be  granted  ;  to  which  he  replied  that  it  was  vacant  and  un- 
occupied, and  that  so  far  as  he  (Berreyesa)  was  concerned,  there 
would  be  no  obstacle  to  the  grant. 

S.  Cooper  testifies  that  he  was  acquainted  with  all  the  rancheros 
in  the  neighborhood  in  1846,  and  ever  since  ;  that  he  never  heard 
of  Rosa's  having  a  grant ;  that  there  was  no  adobe  house  upon  it. 
That  he  was  assessor  during  the  first  two  years  California  was  a 
State  ;  that  all  the  ranches  were  given  in  to  be  assessed  except 
one — but  this  rancho  was  not  given  in  by  any  one,  and  was  not  taxed. 

William  Denton  testifies  that  in  1852  and  1853,  as  County  Sur- 
veyor, he  inquired  of  all  the  old  rancheros  in  the  neighborhood, 
and  that  from  the  information  so  obtained,  he  certified  this  land  to 
be  public  land.  That  he  has  been  conversant  with  the  whole  tract  of 
country  since  1852,  and  never  saw  any  evidence  of  any  old  Span- 
ish improvements  on  this  land,  or  heard  of  any. 

E.  F.  Elliott  testifies  that  in  the  spring  of  1846,  Rosa  moved 
into  the  same  house  with  himself,  and  purported  to  be  a  school 
teacher ;  that  he  had  no  property,  and  since  the  war  he  has  fol- 
lowed the  business  of  a  tailor,  and  sometimes  worked  in  General 
Vallejo's  vineyard.  The  witness  further  states  that  he  was  per- 
sonally acquainted  with  the  whole  neighborhood,  and  worked  in 
every  rodeo ;  that  his  business  was  killing  cattle  for  their  hides 
and  tallow,  and  that  Rosa  did  not  have,  during  the  years  1846, 
1847,  1848  and  1849,  cattle  to  the  number  of  from  three  hundred 
to  five  hundred,  the  same  number  of  horses,  or  any  less  number, 
nor  could  he  have  had  them  without  the  witness'  knowledge.  That 
he  never  saw  the  brand  delineated  by  Rosa  on  any  cattle ;  that  he 
would  have  seen  it  had  it  been  there. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  353 

Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

The  witness  gives  from  memory  some  sixteen  brands  which  were 
upon  cattle  in  the  neighborhood.  He  further  states  that  he  has 
heard  Rosa  frequently  complain  of  his  poverty,  but  never  heard 
him  speak  of  having  any  property. 

Elmsley  Elliott  swears  to  nearly  the  same  facts.  He  states  that 
Rosa's  family  has  often  come  to  his  father's  house  begging  for 
something  to  eat ;  that  he  has  traveled  all  over  the  country,  and 
has  never  heard  of  Rosa's  owning  the  stock  described  by  him  ; 
that  Rosa  has  told  him  more  than  twenty  times,  from  1845  to  1849, 
that  he  did  not  own  any  such. 

John  Cameron,  a  witness  for  the  claimants,  who  has  resided  in 
Sonoma  from  April,  1847,  until  March,  1854,  stated  that  he  never 
knew  Rosa  to  be  the  owner  of  any  number  of  horses  and  cattle. 
That  he  was  acquainted  with  all  the  brands  used  from  Sutter's  to 
San  Rafael,  and  he  never  had  any  pointed  out  to  him  as  Rosa's 
brand  ;  that  he  was  generally  supposed  to  be  a  very  poor  man. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  recapitulate  all  the  evidence  on  this  point. 
A  careful  perusal  of  it  has  led  me  irresistibly  to  the  conclusion  that 
it  is  not  proved  that  Rosa  either  occupied,  built  upon  or  cultivated 
this  rancho.  From  the  whole  testimony  in  the  case,  as  well  on  the 
part  of  the  claimants  as  of  the  United  States,  it  clearly  appears 
that  up  to  the  latter  part  of  1844,  Rosa's  residence  was  in  Mon- 
terey, where  he  was  employed  as  printer.  That  in  1844,  or  the 
beginning  of  1845,  he  came  to  Sonoma,  where  he  resided  with  his 
family  until  after  the  conquest ;  that  he  was  poor,  and  obtained  his 
livelihood  by  mending  clothes  and  watches,  and  similar  occupations. 

From  1846  to  1848,  it  is  stated  by  one  of  the  claimants'  own 
witnesses,  (J.  P.  Leese)  that  he  lived  with  General  Vallejo,  to 
whose  children  he  taught  music,  and  that  Vallejo,  from  charitable 
motives,  gave  him  an  opportunity  to  support  himself. 

Since  the  organization  of  the  Board  of  Commissioners,  he  is 
stated  by  one  of  the  witnesses  to  have  added  to  his  ordinary  busi- 
ness as  a  tailor,  the  more  profitable  profession  of  testifying  in  land 
cases. 

No  one  can  read  the  depositions  of  the  numerous  witnesses  who 
testify  as  to  his  continued  residence  in  Sonoma,  as  to  his  circum- 
stances and  means  of  livehhood,  and  avoid  the  conviction  that  his 


354  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

statement  as  to  the  occupation  of  the  rancho,  his  ownership  of  fifty 
tame  and  three  or  four  hundred  wild  horses,  etc.,  is  incredible. 

To  all  this  may  be  added  the  repeated  declarations  of  Rosa,  that 
he  never  owned  a  rancho,  and  had  never  applied  for  one. 

This  last  evidence,  however,  is  met  on  the  part  of  the  claimants 
by  that  of  George  C.  Yount  and  Narciso  Botello.  The  first  of 
these  witnesses  swears  that  sometime  in  1846,  Rosa  told  him  he  had 
a  rancho,  and  to  the  best  of  his  (witness')  belief,  stated  that  it  lay 
between  Baca  and  Bidwell's  ranch,  and  was  called  Pulpones  or 
Pulpines. 

Narciso  Botello  swears  that  he  remembers  that  while  a  member 
of  the  Assembly  he  heard  some  talk  of  an  application  by  Rosa  for 
a  grant  in  Sonoma ;  that  he  does  not  know  whether  he  ever  ob- 
tained the  grant,  nor  was  he  informed  of  the  fact  until  he  recently 
saw  the  papers  exhibited  by  the  claimants. 

The  circumstance  stated  by  Botello  may  perhaps  explain  the  tes- 
timony of  Mr.  Yount.  It  may  be  that  Rosa  did  endeavor  to  obtain 
a  grant,  or  that  "  there  was  some  talk  about  it,"  and  he  may  have 
stated  that  fact  to  Mr.  Yount.  At  all  events,  I  do  not  feel  at  lib- 
erty to  receive  this  testimony  of  an  isolated  declaration  as  out- 
weighing the  evidence  of  so  many  witnesses,  who  testify  as  to  his 
residence,  his  mode  of  Hfe,  his  means  of  livelihood,  and  his  repeated 
declarations  that  he  owned  no  rancho  whatever. 

Having  thus  seen  that  no  evidence  of  the  authenticity  of  this 
grant  is  afforded  by  the  archives  of  the  former  government,  nor  by 
the  production  of  the  documents  from  the  proper  custody,  nor  by 
proof  of  an  occupation  of  the  land,  we  proceed  to  consider  the  evi- 
dence as  to  the  genuineness  of  the  signatures. 

A  large  number  of  witnesses  testify,  on  the  part  of  the  claimants, 
that  in  their  opinion  the  signatures  of  Pio  Pico  are  genuine. 

On  the  part  of  the  United  States,  several  witnesses  testify  that 
they  believe  them  to  be  forgeries  ;  and  one  of  them  expresses  the 
opinion  that  they  were  written  by  the  person  who  wrote  the  body 
of  the  instrument — that  is,  by  Covarrubias. 

It  is  admitted  by  all  the  witnesses  for  the  claimants  that  the  sig- 
natures of  Pico  in  these  documents  are  unlike  his  usual  mode  of 
writing  his  name,  although  it  is  stated  by  them  that  his  mode  of 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  355 

Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

signing  his  name  was  not  uniform.  The  deposition  of  Pico  himself 
has  been  taken  since  the  case  was  appealed,  but  a  traced  copy  of 
the  grant,  and  not  the  original,  was  submitted  to  him.  The  testi- 
mony of  Pico  is  singularly  guarded.  He  says  he  cannot  now  re- 
member in  regard  to  the  original  document,  "  but  the  signature  as 
it  appears  in  the  traced  copy  appears  to  be  my  signature,  and  I 
believe  my  signature  was  placed  to  the  document  at  the  time  it 
bears  date."  He  repeats  totidum  verbis  the  same  answer  to  three 
successive  interrogatories. 

To  the  seventh  interrogatory  he  answers  :  "  I  do  not  now  re- 
member of  the  grant  of  land  mentioned  in  the  interrogatory,  except 
from  the  papers  shown  me,  and  therefore  cannot  state  further  in 
regard  to  it." 

In  answer  to  the  first  cross-interrogatory  he  says :  "  My  state- 
ment in  regard  to  my  signature  is  made  from  inspection  of  the 
papers  now  presented  to  me,  and  not  from  recollection  of  signing 
the  originals.  I  believe,  however,  from  my  best  recollection,  that 
the  original  documents  were  signed  by  me  at  the  time  they  bear 
date." 

To  the  second  cross-interrogatory  he  says :  "I  speak  of  the 
papers  as  they  are  now  shown  me,  and  not  from  recollection  of  the 
events  as  they  transpired." 

It  is  evident  that  the  testimony  of  the  witness  merely  amounts 
to  a  statement  that  the  signature,  a  traced  copy  of  which  is  shown 
him,  appears  to  he  his.  But  the  fact  of  the  application  for,  or  is- 
suance of  the  title,  he  is  wholly  unable  to  recollect. 

The  depositions  of  John  W.  Shore  and  Joseph  A.  Hinchman 
have  also  been  taken  since  the  appeal. 

These  witnesses  testify  in  substance  that  there  is  now  on  file  in 
the  County  Clerk's  office,  at  Los  Angeles,  a  document  purporting 
to  be  signed  by  Pio  Pico,  a  traced  copy  of  which  is  annexed  .to 
their  deposition.  One  of  them  swears  that  he  believes  the  signa- 
ture to  be  genuine.  The  document  is  dated  October,  1845,  and 
the  signature  somewhat  resembles,  in  the  formation  of  the  "  P's  " 
in  Pio  Pico's  name,  the  signature  in  the  case  at  bar.  It  difiers 
from  it,  however,  very  perceptibly.  It  is  this  resemblance,  such  as 
it  is,  which  alone  gives  importance  to  the  testimony.     But  un- 


356  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 


fortunately  it  does  not  appear  that  this  document  is  genuine. 
Shore  testifies,  April  24th,  1857,  that  it  had  been  in  its  present 
custody,  to  his  knowledge,  about  three  years  and  a  half.  Whether 
it  was  then  filed  for  the  first  time  does  not  appear.  A  document 
filed  at  the  end  of  the  year  1853,  with  a  signature  resembling  those 
now  in  question,  cannot  certainly  aid  the  claimants.  Shore,  it  is 
true,  expresses  his  behef  that  the  signature  is  genuine,  but  his  tes- 
timony is  of  no  greater  force  than  if  he  had  expressed  the  same  be- 
lief with  regard  to  the  signatures  to  the  papers  in  this  case.  It  is 
but  one  more  witness  in  addition  to  prove  the  genuineness  of  the 
signature.  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  Pio  Pico  is  not  himself 
asked  whether  his  signature  to  this  document  is  genuine,  although 
he  resides  in  Los  Angeles  county,  where  the  original  is  kept,  and 
was,  it  is  presumed,  accessible. 

Since  the  cause  was  submitted,  the  Court  being  desirous  of  ob- 
taining more  full  information  from  the  archives,  directed  an  exami- 
nation of  them  by  Mr.  Hopkins,  the  clerk  in  charge.  Mr.  Hopkins 
was  therefore  examined  by  the  Court,  with  liberty  to  either  side  to 
cross-examine  him.  From  Mr.  Hopkins'  testimony  it  appears  that 
the  signature  of  Pio  Pico  appears  in  various  expedientes  on  file  in 
the  archives  two  hundred  and  ninety-eight  times  ;  that  on  the 
journal  of  the  Assembly  it  occurs  one  hundred  and  thirty-one  times  ; 
and  on  various  grants  in  1845  and  1846,  about  one  hundred  times. 

The  signatures  in  the  expedientes,  and  on  the  journals,  are  re- 
markable for  their  uniformity.  Those  on  the  expedientes  are  ex- 
actly similar,  without  a  single  exception  ;  those  on  the  journals  are 
also  uniform,  with  the  exception  of  a  single  sheet,  signed  ^'  Pico." 
This  appears  to  be  a  loose  borrador,  or  blotter,  and  the  signature  is 
unlike  any  other  that  appears  in  the  records. 

The  one  hundred  signatures  in  the  grants  present  the  same 
uniformity,  with  some  exceptions.  The  first  is  that  in  the  case  of 
Prudon  and  Vaca,  hereafter  alluded  to.  Mr.  Hopkins  expresses  the 
opinion  that  it  is  a  forgery. 

The  next  is  a  signature  bearing  a  striking  resemblance  to  that 
last  mentioned.  It  is  attached  to  the  certificate  of  approval  of  the 
grant  of  Petaluma  to  M.  G.  Vallejo. 

The  next  is  the  decree  of  concession  in  case  number  six  hundred 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  357 

Luco  ct  al.  y.  United  States. 

and  forty-eight,  before  the  Commission.  It  differs,  says  Mr.  Hop- 
kins, from  all  others  that  he  has  seen.  The  "  P's  "  are  made  some- 
what in  the  style  of  those  in  the  present  case.  The  remaining 
signatures  are  attached  to  various  documents,  dated  from  January 
to  July,  1846. 

All  these  last  differ  from  all  others.  They  are  all  uniform  and 
resemble  each  other.  They  differ  from  all  others  in  the  form  of 
the  "  P's." 

A  letter  written  by  Pio  Pico,  as  administrator  of  a  Mission  in 
1839,  is  also  produced.  The  signature  resembles  that  in  the  present 
case.  No  similar  signature  occurs  later  than  1839.  At  that  time 
he  appears  to  have  used  this  last  form  of  signature,  and  that  pre- 
viously described,  indifferently.  All  these  documents  were  pro- 
duced in  Court,  and  submitted  to  inspection. 

From  the  foregoing  it  appears  that  from  the  beginning  of  his 
official  career,  up  to  the  year  1846,  throughout  all  the  expedientes 
on  the  journals  of  the  Assembly,  (with  the  exception  of  one  sheet 
supposed  to  be  a  borrador)  and  in  every  grant,  with  three  excep- 
tions, Pio  Pico's  signature  was  marked  by  a  uniform  and  striking 
peculiarity.  That  in  grants  made  during  1846,  he  sometimes  used 
another  mode  of  signature  ;  that  this  mode  is  also  uniform  and 
similar  to  that  now  used  by  him,  as  it  appears  on  his  affidavit,  de- 
position, etc.,  in  this  case. 

The  three  exceptions  among  the  grants  made  previously  to  1846, 
are  first,  that  to  Prudon  and  Vaca,  which  is  supposed  to  be  a  forg- 
ery, and  which  is  obviously  intended  to  imitate  his  usual  signature ; 
second,  another  closely  resembling  it ;  and  a  third,  differing  from 
any  other,  and  somewhat  resembling  that  in  this  case. 

Of  all  of  these  numerous  signatures,  not  one  made  since  1839  is 
found  w^hich  in  any  respect  resembles  those  in  the  grant  in  this 
case,  except  the  sohtary  instance  last  mentioned  which,  as  Mr. 
Hopkins  states,  differs  from  all  others,  though  it  somewhat  resem- 
bles those  in  this  case  in  the  form  of  the  "  P's." 

It  thus  appears  that  of  six  hundred  and  twenty-eight  signatures 
made  previous  to  1846,  all  except  four  are  uniform.  That  of  these 
four  one  is  attached  to  a  borrador  or  blotter ;  the  second  is  pro- 
nounced a  forgery  ;  the  third  strikingly  resembles  the  second  ;  the 


358  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

last  is  unlike  any  of  the  others.  No  one  except  the  last  resembles 
in  any  respect  those  in  this  case. 

It  is  not  enough,  therefore,  for  the  claimants  to  show  that  Pio 
Pico  had  various  ways  of  signing  his  name.  They  should  prove 
that  the  mode  adopted  in  this  case  was  one  of  the  modes  used  by 
him.  This  they  have  sought  to  do  by  exhibiting  documents  made 
previously  to  1839,  but  none  since.  Of  six  hundred  and  thirty- 
nine  signatures  made  since  that  time,  all  are  uniform  except  four- 
teen, and  only  one  bears  a  resemblance  to  those  in  this  case. 

On  the  very  day  which  this  grant  purports  to  have  been  issued, 
his  signature  appears  to  other  grants,  exhibiting  its  marked  and 
uniform  characteristics.  In  the  journals  of  the  Assembly  it  occurs 
one  hundred  and  thirty  times,  uniform  and  peculiar.  It  was  cer- 
tainly a  strange  accident  that  in  this  one  grant  he  did  not  adopt 
the  mode  of  signing  which  he  was  then,  and  for  a  long  time  pre- 
vious had  been  daily  using  in  his  official  transactions,  but  recurred 
to  a  mode  of  signature  not  used  by  him  since  1839. 

All  proof  of  handwriting  except  the  direct  evidence  of  those  who 
have  witnessed  the  act  of  writing  is  but  opinion,  founded  on  a  men- 
tal comparison  of  the  writing  in  question  with  other  writing  of  the 
same  party  which  the  witness  has  seen.  But  if,  as  in  this  case, 
more  than  four  hundred  specimens  of  a  signature  of  a  party  are 
presented,  no  one  of  which  is  found,  except  those  made  previously 
to  1839,  to  resemble  that  in  question,  the  opinions  of  witnesses  who 
pronounce  it  genuine  from  its  resemblance  to  other  signatures  be- 
come of  Httle  importance.  It  will  be  urged  that  he  did  use  this 
signature  in  1839,  and  therefore  ma?/  have  used  it  in  this  instance. 
It  is  undoubtedly  possible  that  such  may  have  been  the  case,  but 
it  is  in  a  high  degree  improbable  that  amongst  so  great  a  number 
of  signatures  marked  by  a  uniform  and  striking  peculiarity,  he 
should,  in  this  instance,  have  adopted  a  mode  of  signature  resem- 
bling that  occasionally  used  by  him  six  or  seven  years  previously. 

The  suspicion  involuntarily  suggests  itself,  that  the  grant  was 
not  made  at  the  time  it  bears  date.  But  that  Pio  Pico  himself,  or 
some  one  who  has  forged  his  name,  has  by  mistake  adopted  a  sig- 
nature different  from  that  which  at  the  date  of  the  grant,  or  subse- 
quently, he  was  in  the  habit  of  using. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  359 

Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

On  the  part  of  the  claimants,  M.  G.  Vallejo,  Alvarado,  Josd 
Castro  and  Salvador  Vallejo  testify  that  they  are  acquainted  with 
Pio  Pico's  signatures,  and  believe  those  on  the  documents  in  this 
case  to  be  genuine.  The  last  witness  says  that  he  has  seen  Pio 
Pico's  name  to  grants,  and  that  the  "  P's  "  in  the  signatures  to  the 
documents  are  made  in  his  usual  style  ;  he  also  states  that  Pio 
Pico  wrote  his  name  with  uniformity.  The  gross  inaccuracy  of 
both  of  these  statements  will  not  be  disputed. 

M.  G.  Vallejo  states  that  Pio  Pico  made  his  "  P's  "  like  those 
in  this  case  in  his  common  writino;.  He  has  seen  such  in  his  o;rants 
and  approvals,  and  common  writing  which  he  knew  to  be  his.  He 
cannot  recollect  any  particular  grant  in  which  the  letter  is  so  made. 
The  testimony  of  Mr.  Hopkins  exposes  the  error  of  this  statement. 
Upon  a  grant  by  Pio  Pico  being  shown  to  the  witness,  he  admitted 
that  there  was  no  resemblance  between  the  signature  to  that  docu- 
ment and  those  in  the  case  at  bar,  and  accounts  for  it  by  the  obser- 
vation, "  that  he  may  have  had  more  room  in  that  grant,  or  was 
perhaps  in  a  different  humor." 

Andreas  Pico  swears  that  the  signatures  appear  to  be  the  true 
and  genuine  signatures  of  Pio  Pico.  That  he  formed  his  opinion 
by  comparing  them  with  those  he  has  seen.  That  he  has  seen  a 
great  many  in  the  archives. 

Manuel  Castro,  De  Zaldo  and  Benito  Diaz  all  express  the  opinion 
that  the  signatures  are  genuine.  To  this  testimony  may  be  added 
that  of  Botello,  who  swears  that  in  his  opinion  the  signatures  are 
genuine. 

On  the  other  hand,  Richardson,  Wm.  Carey  Jones,  James  Wil- 
son, a  former  member  of  the  Land  Commission,  and  Thomas  0. 
Larkin,  all  testify  that  in  their  opinion  the  signatures  are  not  gen- 
uine. 

Orlando  McKnight  testifies  that  he  has  been  much  accustomed 
to  examine  and  compare  handwritings  and  considers  himself  capable 
of  judging  whether  a  document  is  written  in  an  assumed  hand.  On 
examining  the  documents  in  this  case  he  expresses  the  opinion  that 
the  signatures  of  Pio  Pico  were  signed  by  the  person  who  wrote 
the  body  of  the  instruments,  that  is,  by  Covarrubias. 

On  comparing  these  signatures  with  seventeen  signatures  of  Pio 


360  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

Pico,  found  in  the  records  of  the  Departmental  Assembly  for  1846, 
he  says  that  the  letters  of  the  name  of  Pio  Pico  in  the  former,  as 
also  the  rubric  attached,  have  the  stiffness  and  clumsiness  difficult 
to  avoid  in  an  imitation,  while  the  seventeen  signatures  appear  nat- 
ural, easy  and  without  restraint.  On  making  a  very  close  exami- 
nation of  the  seventeen  signatures  with  dividers,  he  states  that  he 
never  saw  a  more  uniform  signature. 

J.  H.  Purdy,  also  an  .expert,  is  inclined  to  believe  that  the  sig- 
natures to  the  document  are  in  the  same  handwriting  as  the  body 
of  the  instrument,  but  is  not  positive.  On  comparing  these  signa- 
tures with  those  in  the  record  of  the  Assembly,  he  says  that  the 
differences  between  them  consist  in  the  form  of  the  "  P's,"  and  in 
that  of  the  rubrics,  also  in  their  general  appearance ;  that  the  ru- 
brics in  the  record,  "  though  more  condensed  in  width,  fall  farther 
below  the  line  of  the  writing  of  the  signature  than  those  in  the  doc- 
uments in  this  case. 

It  ought  perhaps  to  be  added,  that  neither  of  these  witnesses 
professes  to  have  any  famiharity  with  Spanish  documents,  or  practice 
in  comparing  handwritings  in  that  language. 

Col.  Jonathan  D.  Stevenson  testifies  that  he  has  corresponded 
with  Pio  Pico,  and  seen  many  documents  purporting  to  be  signed 
by  him  ;  that  in  none  of  them  did  the  signatures  resemble  those  in 
this  case.  That  these  last  are  bolder  and  larger  than  Pio  Pico's 
usual  signature,  and  the  form  of  the  letters,  particularly  that  of  the 
"  P's,"  is  unlike  his  genuine  signature.  He  also  thinks,  from  in- 
spection, that  the  body  of  the  documents  and  the  signatures  were 
written  by  the  same  hand,  and  with  the  same  pen  and  ink.  When 
asked  to  explain  why  he  does  not  believe  these  signatures  genuine, 
he  says,  "  To  use  a  school-boy's  phrase,  I  think  these  letters  were 
'  painted,'  after  they  were  formed.  The  difference  is  more  easily 
pointed  out  than  explained." 

I  have  thus  recapitulated,  perhaps  unnecessarily,  all  the  evidence 
as  to  the  genuineness  of  the  signatures. 

It  is  certainly  not  overstating  its  force  to  say  that  it  leaves  it 
open  to  the  gravest  suspicions — suspicions  which  the  inspection  of 
the  originals  has  not  tended  to  weaken. 

At  the  end  of  the  grant  produced  by  the  claimants,  is  the  memo- 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  361 

Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

randum  signed  by  the  Secretary,  Covarrubias,  stating  that  a  note 
of  the  title  had  been  taken  in  the  corresponding  book.  This  Covar- 
rubias, in  his  deposition,  states  to  have  been  done.  The  "  corres- 
ponding book"  is  found  in  the  archives,  but  it  contains  no  note  of 
this  grant.  Covarrubias  swears  that  the  book  in  which  he  entered 
this  grant  was  not  the  one  now  produced.  That  it  was  not  bound, 
but  composed  of  sheets  of  paper  sewed  together.  That  in  it  were 
entered  various  "  tomas  de  razon,"  in  the  handwriting  of  himself 
and  of  his  two  clerks.  That  he  was  in  the  habit  of  placing  his  ini- 
tials "J.  M.  C."  at  the  bottom  of  each  entry.  The  entries  for 
1845,  in  the  book  now  produced,  are  in  the  handwriting  of  Fran- 
cisco Lopez,  one  of  his  clerks  at  that  time. 

This  statement  is  corroborated  by  the  testimony  of  Narciso  Bo- 
tello.  This  witness  swears  that  the  book  found  in  the  archives  is 
not  that  used  by  the  government  for  the  registry  of  titles  at  Los 
Angeles.  That  the  latter  was  a  Cuaderno^  with  loose  leaves  with- 
out binding,  and  generally  in  the  handwriting  of  Covarrubias.  He 
states  that  the  writing  in  the  last  part  is  that  of  Francisco  Lopez, 
and  that  on  page  seven  to  be  the  writing  of  Don  Augustin  01  vera, 
the  Governor's  secretary. 

On  the  other  hand,  Thomas  0.  Larkin,  a  witness  produced  by 
the  claimants,  testifies  that  he  was  acquainted  with  the  books  in 
the  office  of  the  Secretary  during  the  years  1845  and  1846.  That 
there  was  only  one  book,  and  he  believes  the  book  produced  from 
the  archives  to  be  the  one  referred  to  by  him.  That  he  saw  this 
book  in  the  Secretary's  office  in  the  time  of  Micheltorena,  and  also 
among  the  archives  when  they  were  delivered  over  to  the  Ameri- 
cans in  August  or  September,  1846. 

No  other  book  of  "  Tomas  de  Razon,"  for  1845,  is  found  in  the 
archives,  and  the  testimony  of  Mr.  Larkin  would  seem  sufficiently 
to  identify  it  as  that  in  which  the  entries  for  that  year  were  made. 
But  even  admitting  the  accuracy  of  Covarrubias'  statement,  it  is 
evident  that  as  the  entries  are  in  the  handwriting  of  one  of  his 
clerks,  and  the  book  was  dehvered  to  the  Americans  in  1846, 
among  the  other  public  records,  the  entries  must  have  been  made 
nearly  cotemporaneously  with  their  dates.  It  is  possible,  however, 
that  they  were  copied  from  some  loose  sheets  or  "  borradors,"  such 


362  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

as  those  spoken  of  by  Covarrubias  and  Botello,  and  the  absence  of 
any  note  of  this  grant  is  not,  therefore,  entirely  conclusive  as  to  its 
genuineness. 

On  examining  this  book,  however,  it  appears  that  with  one  ex- 
ception, every  grant  in  colonization,  of  which  the  expediente  is 
found  in  the  archives,  or  which  has  ever  been  presented  to  the 
Board,  made  from  March,  1845,  to  December  of  the  same  year, 
the  dates  at  which  the  entries  begin  and  terminate,  is  found  duly 
noted,  as  of  the  day  on  which  by  the  memorandum  on  the  grant 
the  note  appears  to  have  been  takeii. 

This  grant  purports  to  be  in  favor  of  Victor  Prudon  and  Marcos 
Yaca,  with  an  informe  by  Jose  de  la  Rosa,  and  a  provisional  license 
to  occupy  signed  by  General  Vallejo.  The  expediente  in  this  case 
was  not  found  in  the  archives,  but  was  deposited  by  the  plaintiff's 
counsel  on  the  ninth  of  February,  1852.  This  grant  was  rejected 
by  the  Board  as  spurious.  Its  date  is  on  the  twentieth  of  Decem- 
ber, 1845.  The  last  entry  in  the  book  is  December  23d,  1845. 
Admitting  that  it  is  genuine,  the  absence  of  a  note  of  it  in  the  toma 
de  razon  is  no  impeachment  of  the  accuracy  of  the  book. 

But  with  this  exception,  the  entries  are  complete.  On  the  very 
day  (December  4th)  on  which  the  grant  in  this  case  purports  to 
have  been  made,  two  other  grants  were  made  and  duly  entered ; 
on  the  day  previous,  one  ;  and  another  seven  days  afterwards. 

Conceding,  then,  that  the  book  now  found  in  the  archives  was 
copied  from  loose  sheets,  containing  the  original  cotemporaneous 
entries,  how  can  we  account  for  the  fact  that  this  grant  alone,  of  all 
those  made  during  the  period  over  which  the  entries  extend,  (with 
the  exception  above  noticed)  has  been  omitted  ?  It  is  a  circum- 
stance pregnant  with  suspicion. 

It  is  suggested  that  it  is  possible  that  entries  in  the  book  now 
produced  may  have  been  taken  from  the  expedientes  on  file  ;  and 
as  the  expediente  in  this  case  was  not  on  file,  but  returned  to  the 
party,  this  grant  was  omitted.  This  hypothesis  is  ingenious  but 
highly  improbable.  It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  book  now 
produced  was  found  among  the  archives.  If  it  be  a  copy  of  that 
on  which  the  original  entries  were  made,  it  was  made  under  the 
former  government.     The  borradors  or  loose  sheets  spoken  of  by 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  3G3 

Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

Covarrubias  and  Botello  have  disappeared.  If,  then,  a  clerk  of 
the  former  government  prepared  this  copy,  he  probably  did  so,  not 
from  the  expedientes  on  file,  but  from  the  borradors,  which,  ac- 
cording to  Covarrubias,  existed  so  late  as  the  spring  of  1846,  when 
he  went  out  of  office.  The  fact  that  these  borradors  have  disap- 
peared, and  that  the  book  now  produced  alone  remains,  favors  the 
hypothesis  that  they  may  have  been  destroyed  when  the  copy  was 
taken.  If  this  be  so,  it  is  as  difficult  to  suppose  that  an  entry  of 
this  grant  Vt^as  accidentally  omitted,  in  a  copy  otherwise  so  complete 
and  accurate,  as  to  suppose  it  to  have  been  omitted  on  the  book  in 
which  the  entries  were  originally  made.  In  either  case  the  hy- 
pothesis, if  not  impossible,  is  in  a  high  degree  improbable. 

The  certificate  of  the  approval  of  the  Departmental  Assembly  is 
dated  December  18th,  1845.  The  resolution  of  approval  appears 
to  have  passed  on  the  eleventh  of  the  same  month. 

The  records  of  the  proceediags  of  the  Assembly  at  the  close  of 
1845  and  beginning  of  1846  are  preserved.  They  show  that  on  the 
eighth  of  October,  1845,  "  The  sessions  of  the  Assembly  were  sus 
pended  for  the  rest  of  the  t/ear,  in  consequence  of  permission  having 
been  granted  to  the  Senores  Deputies  who  reside  out  of  this  capital, 
to  retire  to  the  places  of  their  residence,  in  view  of  the  injuries 
they  must  suffer  in  consequence  of  their  salaries  due  them  respect- 
ively as  functionaries  not  being  paid." 

A  publication  of  the  foregoing  in  all  the  pueblos  of  the  depart- 
ment was  ordered  to  be  made  October  11th,  1845. 

The  next  session  of  the  Assembly,  as  shown  by  its  journals,  was 
on  the  second  of  March,  1846.  The  journals  state  that  the  Gov- 
ernor and  certain  deputies,  who  are  named,  had  "  assembled  for  the 
purpose  of  reopening  the  ordinary  sessions,  which,  by  a  resolution 
of  the  body,  had  been  suspended  for  the  balance  of  last  year. 
Whereupon  the  proceedings  of  the  eighth  day  of  October  of  the 
last  year  were  read  and  approved,"  etc. 

It  is  evident  that  no  ordinary  session  of  the  Assembly  was  held 
on  the  eleventh  of  December,  the  day  on  which  this  grant  is  cer- 
tified to  have  been  approved. 

It  is  contended,  however,  that  extraordinary  sessions  were  held, 
24 


364  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 


of  which  no  record  was  kept,  and  the  testimony  of  several  witnesses 
has  been  taken  to  establish  the  fact. 

Juan  Bandini  testifies  that  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  As- 
sembly in  1846,  and  took  his  seat  in  the  beginning  of  that  year; 
that  he  knows  that  an  extraordinary  session  was  held  from  the 
eighth  of  October  until  the  end  of  the  year  1845  ;  that  the  ordi- 
nary session  was  commenced  in  the  month  of  February,  1846,  and 
of  this  he  was  a  member.  The  business  transacted  at  the  extraor- 
dinary sessions  related  to  the  mission  of  one  Jose  Maria  Hijar,  and 
the  confirmation  of  land  titles,  and  granting  the  same. 

Santiago  Arguello  makes  the  same  statement  in  almost  the  same 
language.  Both  repeat  several  times  that  they  took  their  seats  in 
the  ordinary  session,  held  in  February,  1846 ;  according  to  Ar- 
guello, about  the  first  of  that  month. 

Unfortunately  for  these  witnesses,  the  record  of  the  first  ordinary 
session  of  1846  is  preserved,  whereby  it  appears,  as  we  have  seen, 
that  the  Assembly  resumed  its  ordinary  sessions  on  the  second  of 
March,  and  not  on  the  first  of  February ;  that  the  proceedings  of 
the  last  ordinary  session,  to  wit,  that  of  the  eighth  of  October, 
1845,  were  first  read  and  approved,  and  that  the  next  business 
transacted  was  the  reception  of  the  credentials  of  Don  Juan  Ban- 
dini and  Don  Santiago  Arguello  ;  that  the  usual  proceedings  were 
on  motion  dispensed  with ;  that  the  newly  elected  members  were 
received  by  a  committee  of  the  body  ;  that  after  making  oath,  as 
prescribed  by  law,  they  took  their  seats,  and  were  congratulated  by 
the  Hon.  President,  who  expressed  his  pleasure  at  their  incorpora- 
tion into  the  body. 

It  is  singular  that  both  of  these  witnesses  should  have  fallen  into 
the  same  error  with  reference  to  a  fact  of  which  they  speak  so  pos- 
itively. It  justifies  the  suspicion  that  they  may  also  be  mistaken 
in  their  statement  that  extraordinary  sessions  were  held  from  Oc- 
tober eighth,  until  the  end  of  the  year.  The  journals  of  the  As- 
sembly show  that  secret  and  extraordinary  sessions  were  held  on 
various  days  between  March  4th,  1845,  and  October  8th,  of  the 
same  year.  They  frequently  took  place  on  the  same  day  with  an 
ordinary  session,  and  the  journals  of  the  latter  mention  that  the  As- 
sembly went  into  secret  session  on  the  motion,  etc.     These  secret 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  365 


Luco  ct  al.  V.  United  States. 


or  extraordinary  sessions  appear  to  have  been  not  unlike  the  exec- 
utive sessions  of  the  United  States  Senate,  except  that  in  some  in- 
stances the  proceedings  at  a  secret  session  were  read  and  approved 
at  the  next  ordinary  session. 

But  the  extraordinary  or  called  sessions  which  are  supposed  by 
the  claimants  to  have  taken  place  at  the  end  of  1845,  after  the  sus- 
pension of  the  ordinary  sessions  for  the  rest  of  the  year,  are  of  a 
different  character.  A  document  is  found  in  the  archives,  however, 
which  seems  to  favor  the  idea  that  such  may  have  been  held.  A 
committee,  to  whom  a  motion  that  the  Assembly  dissolve  itself  or 
adjourn  was  referred,  reports  that  it  had  no  such  power,  as  it  was 
always  in  session  as  the  council  of  the  government ;  and  they 
recommend  that,  after  dispatching  some  pressing  business  which 
would  come  up  in  October,  the  Assembly  suspend  its  ordinary  ses- 
sions for  the  rest  of  the  year,  and  that  permission  be  given  to  the 
deputies  residing  at  a  distance  to  return  home. 

The  resolution  of  adjournment  passed  October  8th  seems  to  have 
been  in  pursuance  of  this  recommendation. 

The  cause  having  been  reopened  since  its  first  submission,  the 
evidence  of  Narciso  Bartello  was  taken  in  Court. 

This  witness  states  that  though  he  does  not  recollect  the  fact,  he 
has  no  doubt  that  there  were  extraordinary  sessions  in  18-15,  for  he 
has  seen  documents  which  show  it.  A  document  from  the  archives 
was  shown  to  the  witness,  which  he  stated  to  be  in  the  handwriting 
of  Don  A.  Oivera,  Secretary  to  the  Governor.  This  document  ap- 
pears to  be  a  "  letra  convocatoria,^^  or  summons,  to  the  members 
of  the  Assembly,  to  meet  in  extraordinary  session.  Whether  or 
not  the  session  took  place  the  witness  is  unable  to  recollect,  but  he 
presumes,  from  the  summons,  that  it  did.  If  there  were  any  such 
in  December,  the  witness  states  that  he  must  have  attended  them, 
unless  prevented  by  illness. 

From  all  the  evidence  that  can  be  obtained,  I  think  it  not  impos- 
sible that  extraordinary  sessions  may  have  been  held  after  the  ad- 
journment of  the  eighth  of  October. 

The  cause  of  that  adjournment,  however,  as  declared  in  the  reso- 
lution above  cited,  is  somewhat  inconsistent  with  the  idea  that  the 
members  immediately  reassembled  in  extraordinary  session.     If 


366  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 


they  did  so,  the  record  of  their  proceedings  has  been  lost  by  an- 
other of  those  unfortunate  accidents  which  have  attended  this  case 
at  every  step. 

But  in  addition,  it  is  not  a  little  remarkable  that  if  a  part  of  the 
business  of  this  extraordinary  session  was  the  confirmation  and 
granting  of  titles,  no  title  whatever  of  all  those  granted  previous  to 
the  second  of  March,  1846,  appears  to  have  been  approved  at  any 
extraordinary  session  of  the  Assembly,  between  its  adjournment  on 
the  eighth  of  October,  and  the  reopening  on  the  second  of  March, 
with  two  exceptions— the  grant  in  this  case,  and  that  of  Victor 
Prudon,  above  noticed.  Every  other  grant  made  subsequently  to 
the  eighth  of  October,  and  among  them  one  dated  December  4th, 
the  very  day  on  which  this  title  purports  to  have  been  issued,  was 
reserved  until  the  ordinary  session  of  March,  and  was  at  that  ses- 
sion, as  appears  by  the  record,  presented  and  approved. 

It  is  also  worthy  of  observation,  that  Narciso  Botello  does  not 
pretend  to  recollect  that  an  extraordinary  session  was  in  fact  held 
at  the  time  at  which  it  appears  to  have  been  convened — still  less 
that  at  any  such  meeting  this  grant  was  approved.  He  left  Los 
Angeles  on  the  twenty-fifth  of  December.  The  resolution  of  ap- 
proval was  passed,  if  at  all,  on  the  eleventh.  The  grant  was  large, 
and  in  payment  of  public  dues.  Had  he  been  present  at  any  ses- 
sion at  which  it  was  discussed  and  approved,  it  would  seem  probable 
that  he  would  have  recollected  it.  His  failure  to  do  so,  however, 
is  by  no  means  a  strong  circumstance  against  the  genuineness  of 
the  certificate.  It  deserves,  however  to  be  noted  and  considered 
amongst  the  other  circumstances  of  the  case. 

But  the  United  States  have  produced  direct  testimony  to  prove 
the  time  and  place  at  which  these  papers  were  fabricated.  Rafael 
Guirado  testifies  that  in  the  month  of  August,  1853,  about  nine 
o'clock,  A.  M.,  Jose  de  la  Rosa,  in  company  with  the  Messrs. 
Luco  and  Salvador  Yallejo,  came  to  the  house  of  General  Vallejo 
and  inquired  for  the  latter.  After  about  two  hours  he  came  in, 
when  they  all  entered  his  ofiice,  where  they  seated  themselves  at  a 
table.  The  witness  overheard  their  conversation,  which  related  to 
"  settling  "  the  Rancho  of  Ulpines.  General  Vallejo  offering  to 
put  three  hundred  mares  upon  it,  etc.     The  next  day  a  similar  in- 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  367 

Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

terview  took  place,  and  after  the  rest  were  gone,  General  Vallejo 
said  to  the  witness,  "  I  am  transacting  some  important  business," 
and  asked  if  he  had  overheard  it.  To  which  the  witness  replied 
that  he  had.  The  General,  after  some  expressions  of  his  confidence 
in  the  witness,  proceeded  to  inform  him  of  the  "  plan  "  they  had 
arranged.  "  The  title,"  he  said,  "  we  have  made  in  the  name  of 
Rosa.  It  supposes  a  certain  amount  to  be  due  him  as  printer  at 
Monterey ;  that  his  brother  Salvador  had  gone  to  Los  Angeles  and 
succeeded  in  obtaining  the  signature  of  Pio  Pico  to  the  title."  The 
witness  then  said  to  Vallejo  that  the  title  was  false,  to  which  the 
General  replied,  "  I  know  it.  It  is  in  this  way  we  have  planned  ; 
how  can  it  be  false,  it  has  the  signature  of  Pio  Pico  ?"  After  some 
further  conversation  detailed  by  the  witness.  General  Vallejo  said 
in  reply  to  an  observation  by  the  witness,  that  the  title  was  void, 
and  it  would  in  time  be  discovered.  "  In  that  case  it  would  be 
diamond  cut  diamond,"  and  he  explained  this  expression  to  mean 
that  if  there  were  six  or  seven  persons  to  swear  that  the  title  is  null 
(nulo)  he  would  bring  ten  or  twelve  to  swear  to  its  genuineness.  If 
this  story  be  true,  the  character  of  this  claim  is  placed  beyond  a 
doubt. 

Guirado  has,  however,  been  impeached  by  various  witnesses  on 
the  part  of  the  claimants,  and  sustained  by  perhaps  an  equal  number 
on  the  part  of  the  United  States.  It  would  be  useless,  perhaps  im- 
practicable, to  attempt  to  decide  upon  a  comparison  of  this  testi- 
mony whether  or  not  his  character  is  such  as  to  justify  a  belief  in 
his  statements.  Whatever  it  was,  whether  infamous  or  respectable, 
one  fact  is  clear,  that  General  Vallejo,  so  late  as  March,  1855,  cor- 
responded with  him  on  terms  of  friendship  and  intimacy.  The  re- 
lations which  General  Vallejo's  letter  of  March  4th,  1855,  show  to 
have  existed  between  them,  must  either  reheve  Guirado  from  the  im- 
putations cast  upon  his  character,  or  that  of  Vallejo  himself  must 
in  some  degree  be  compromised. 

If  Guirado's  testimony  stood  alone,  and  if  in  other  respects  this 
claim  seemed  fair  and  genuine,  I  should  hesitate  long  before  re- 
jecting it  on  the  faith  of  such  a  statement.  I  have  alluded  to  it  as 
an  item  of  evidence  entitled  to  consideration. 

It  is  urged  that  according  to  this  story,  the  signatures  are  the 


368  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 


genuine  signatures  of  Pio  Pico,  though  the  document  may  be  ante- 
dated, and  it  disproves  the  theory  of  the  United  States  that  they 
are  forged. 

To  this  it  may  be  replied,  that  General  Vallejo  may  not  have 
known,  or  may  have  been  unwilling  to  disclose  the  name  of  the  per- 
son who  forged  the  signatures.  The  risk  of  punishment  to  him 
would  be  far  greater  than  to  those  who  merely  expressed  an  opinion 
as  to  their  genuineness,  or  Pio  Pico  may  in  fact  have  signed  the 
document,  but  have  forgotten  to  adopt  the  mode  of  signature  used 
by  him  at  its  date. 

Since  the  case  was  reopened,  testimony  has  been  taken  with  re- 
gard to  the  seals.  It  appears  by  the  evidence  of  Wm.  B.  McMur- 
trie,  that  the  impression  or  seal  on  the  grant  in  this  case  is  different, 
and  evidently  made  by  a  stamp  different  from  that  used  on  the  pe- 
tition and  the  certificate  of  approval. 

The  impressions  on  these  latter  are  identical  with  those  used  on 
various  expedientes  and  grants  exhibited  to  the  witness.  Four  of 
these  were  produced  in  Court,  dated  at  various  times  from  April 
21st,  1843,  to  May  2d,  1846. 

The  impression  on  the  grant  in  this  case  is  entirely  dissimilar, 
and  the  witness  not  only  expresses  the  positive  opinion,  but  demon- 
strates that  it  could  not  have  been  made  with  the  same  seal  as 
that  used  on  the  other  documents.  Photographs  have  been  taken 
of  these  impressions,  and  the  difference  is  obvious  on  inspection. 
How  then  is  this  fact  to  be  accounted  for  ?  Covarrubias  swears 
that  he  recollects  of  only  one  seal  being  used  in  the  office  of  the 
Secretary.  How  happens  it  that  the  petition  and  certificate  bear 
the  impression  of  the  genuine  seal,  while  the  grant  has  an  impres- 
sion of  one  which,  if  not  proven  not  to  be  genuine,  is  not  found  on 
any  other  document  in  the  archives  ?  It  is  true  that  this  fact  is  not 
specifically  sworn  to  by  any  witness,  but  since  the  testimony  of 
McMurtrie  was  taken,  ample  opportunity  has  been  afforded  to  the 
claimants  to  examine  the  archives.  If  a  seal  similar  to  that  on  the 
grant  could  have  been  found,  it  w^ould  doubtless  have  been  produced. 
It  is  argued  that  this  testimony  estabHshes  at  least  the  genuine- 
ness of  two  of  the  seals  on  these  papers,  even  though  it  casts  a 
doubt  on  the  third.     But  we  have  already  seen  that  at  the  time  the 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  369 


Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 


grant  was  exhibited  to  Covarrubias  and  Pio  Pico  to  procure  the 
affidavits  on  which  the  action  of  Congress  was  founded,  it  was  unac- 
companied bj  either  the  petition  or  the  certificate  of  approval. 
How  these  papers  were  separated  from  the  grant,  or  how  since  re- 
united to  it,  does  not  appear.  The  difference,  therefore,  in  the  seals, 
tends  to  corroborate  our  suspicions  that  the  petition  and  certificate 
may  have  been  prepared  subsequently  to  the  grant,  as  they  cer- 
tainly did  not  appear  in  the  cause  until  long  after  the  production  of 
the  grant  to  Covarrubias  and  Pico. 

It  does  not  appear  where  or  in  whose  custody  the  seal  of  the 
former  government  now  is ;  and  if  any  one  of  the  documents  ex- 
hibited bears  a  spurious  seal,  it  throws  a  doubt  upon  the  genuine- 
ness of  them  all,  which  is  not  dispelled  by  the  fact  that  on  two  of 
them  the  seals  appear  to  be  genuine. 

Another  circumstance  is  also  worthy  of  observation.  Eleven  ex- 
pedientes  have  been  produced  from  the  archives,  with  a  view  of 
exhibiting  not  only  the  signatures  of  Pio  Pico,  but  his  title  or  the 
description  of  his  office,  as  contained  in  the  headings  of  the  grants. 

These  expedientes  are  regularly  numbered,  and  are  dated  at 
various  times  from  November  22d,  1845,  to  Decem.ber  19ih,  1845. 
In  all  of  them  Pio  Pico  is  described  as  "  Vocal  decano  de  la  assam- 
blea  departmental  y  Gobernador  provisional  de  las  Californias." 

In  the  grant  produced  in  the  case  at  bar,  and  in  the  certificate 
of  approval,  he  is  described  as  "  Vocal  decano  de  la  Exma  Assem- 
blea  del  Departmento  de  las  Californias  y  encargado  del  gobierno 
del  mismo  por  ministerio  de  la  ley." 

It  is  singular,  that  if  this  grant  be  genuine,  the  Governor  should 
in  this  one  instance  have  deviated  from  the  form  which  he  had  been 
using  almost  daily  in  his  official  acts  for  a  considerable  time,  and 
which  he  adopted  in  three  grants  undoubtedly  genuine,  made  on 
the  very  day  on  which  this  grant  purports  to  have  been  issued. 

It  is  another  of  those  extraordinary  accidents  which  it  is  difficult 
to  suppose  could  all  have  occurred  by  a  kind  of  fatality,  in  one  un- 
fortunate case. 

From  the  foregoing  review  of  the  evidence  in  this  case,  it  is,  I 
think,  apparent  that  at  every  point  it  is  liable  to  the  gravest  sus- 
picion. 


370  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

We  find  that  papers  constituting  a  complete  title  for  one  of  the 
most  valuable  ranchos  in  California  have  been  unaccountably  with- 
held from  the  Board  appointed  to  ascertain  their  vaUdity,  until  the 
time  for  presenting  them  has  expired,  although  the  lands  are  sit- 
uated in  one  of  the  most  fertile  and  inhabited  districts  of  the  State, 
and  although  all  the  neighbors  of  the  grantee,  including  his  friend 
and  patron.  General  Yallejo,  duly  presented  their  claims  for  con- 
firmation. 

We  find  that  when  the  grant  was  submitted  to  counsel  for  in- 
spection, and  to  Pico  and  Covarrubias  for  their  affidavits,  if  indeed 
it  was  the  same  paper  as  that  now  presented,  it  was  certainly  unac- 
companied by  the  petition,  and  almost  certainly  unaccompanied  by 
the  certificate  of  approval. 

That  these  papers  have  since  been  produced  attached  to  the 
grant,  but  when  and  by  whom  we  know  not.  That  the  petition  is 
found,  not  in  the  archives,  which  was  the  legal  and  usual  place  of 
custody,  but  in  the  possession  of  the  party,  though  the  secretary  of 
the  government  has  no  recollection  of  ever  having  withdrawn  any 
expediente  from  the  archives,  nor  does  he  remember  sending  any 
document  whatever  to  the  grantee  in  this  case. 

How,  and  why,  and  when,  and  by  whom  this  petition  was  ob- 
tained from  the  archives,  we  are  wholly  uninformed,  except  by  the 
statement  of  De  la  Rosa  that  it  was  delivered  to  him  by  Vallejo, 
which  the  latter  denies.  Why  and  how  it  became  separated  from 
the  grant  is  likewise  unexplained,  as  is  also  the  singular  fact  that, 
having  this  petition  in  their  possession,  the  claimants  should  have 
procured  from  Covarrubias  the  affidavit  stating  that  he  did  not  know 
where  it  was,  and  "  that  the  practice  was  to  return  the  petition  with 
the  grant." 

If  it  was  not  then  in  the  claimants'  possession,  where  was  it  ?  In 
whose  custody  ?  And  how  and  whence  has  it  been  procured  ? 

We  find  also  that  the  pretended  occupation  by  De  la  Rosa  of 
this  land  has  been  disproved  by  so  great  a  preponderance  of  evi- 
dence as  to  suggest  the  most  painful  suspicions. 

We  find  the  archives  not  only  failing  to  exhibit  any  trace  of  the 
existence  of  the  grant,  but  unless  a  series  of  extraordinary  accidents 
be  supposed,  absolutely  disproving  its  existence. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  371 

Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

We  find  that  the  signatures  of  the  Governor,  though  sworn  to  as 
genuine,  are  by  many  disinterested  witnesses  declared  to  be  forg- 
eries ;  while  the  Governor  himself  testifies  with  caution  and  re- 
serve, and  is  wholly  unable  to  recollect  a  single  circumstance 
connected  with  the  grant. 

We  find  that  in  the  opinion  of  many  respectable  persons,  the 
characters  of  the  principal  witnesses  for  the  claimants  are  such  as 
to  render  them  unworthy  of  belief. 

And  finally,  we  find  the  suspicions  of  the  fraudulent  character  of 
this  claim,  so  vehemently  excited  by  every  circumstance  attending 
it,  are  confirmed  by  the  detailed  and  circumstantial  disclosure  by  a 
witness  who,  whatever  his  character,  was  certainly  in  the  confidence 
of  General  Vallcjo,  of  the  time  and  place  and  manner  of  its  fabri- 
cation. 

Such  an  array  of  proofs  I  confess  myself  unable  to  resist.  But 
in  addition : 

To  hold  this  grant  genuine  we  must  suppose  that  by  some  unex- 
plained accident,  and  contrary  to  custom,  the  petition  was  delivered 
to  the  party — that  it  remained  with  the  grant  in  his  possession,  un- 
seen hy  any  one,  and  unsuspected  by  almost  all  of  his  neighbors 
and  intimate  associates.  That  the  owner  of  so  valuable  an  estate 
was  content  to  remain  a  dependent  upon  the  bounty  of  a  wealthy 
friend,  or  to  obtain  a  livelihood  by  mending  clothes  and  similar  em- 
ployments, and  never  himself  thought,  or  was  reminded  by  his 
friend,  of  the  necessity  of  presenting  his  title  for  confirmation. 
That  he  has  frequently  and  without  a  motive  declared  that  he  never 
obtained  any  grant  whatever. 

That  the  petition,  the  grant,  and  the  certificate  of  approval, 
though  together  in  the  possession  of  the  grantee,  were  by  some  un- 
explained accident  separated  when  he  transferred  his  title  to  the 
claimants.  That  the  first  and  the  last  documents,  after  disap- 
pearing for  a  time,  were  in  some  unexplained  way  recovered,  and 
reunited  to  the  grant  after  the  papers  had  been  submitted  to  coun- 
sel and  affidavits  to  be  laid  before  Congress  had  been  procured. 

We  must  further  suppose  that  the  note  of  the  grant  was  taken  in 
a  book  which  has  disappeared.  That  in  the  book  which  remains, 
and  is  by  one  witness  identified  as  the  book  in  which  titles  were 


372  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

Luco  et  al.  v.  United  States. 

noted,  a  note  of  this  grant  was  by  some  strange  accident  omitted, 
although  every  other  grant  issued  during  the  period  over  which  the 
record  extends  is  found  duly  noted. 

We  must  suppose  that  in  this  instance,  almost  solitary,  the  Gov- 
ernor made  an  extensive  grant  without  requiring  a  single  report  or 
informe,  and  has  entirely  forgotten  the  circumstance. 

We  must  further  suppose,  that  the  Departmental  Assembly  held 
an  extraordinary  session,  of  which  their  journals  contain  no  trace, 
and  this  after  a  formal  adjournment  for  the  rest  of  the  year,  and 
after  permission  given  to  the  members  to  return  home.  That  the 
journal  of  their  proceedings  on  reassembling  alludes  to  the  fact  of 
their  previous  adjournment  for  the  balance  of  the  last  year,  and 
shows  that  the  reading  and  approval  of  the  proceedings  of  the  last 
ordinary  session  was  the  first  business  transacted,  while  all  mention 
of  the  supposed  extraordinary  sessions  in  the  interval  is  omitted. 

We  must  further  suppose,  that  all  the  grants  issued  in  the  in- 
terval between  the  adjournment  on  the  eighth  of  October,  and  the 
reassembling  on  the  second  of  March,  were  reserved  by  the  Gov- 
ernor until  after  the  ordinary  sessions  had  recommenced,  with  the 
exception  of  this  grant  and  one  other  rejected  by  the  Board  as 
spurious. 

We  must  suppose  that  the  Governor — although  his  name  appears 
to  public  documents  of  various  kinds,  signed  with  singular  uniformity 
several  hundred  times — in  this  instance  adopted  a  mode  of  signing, 
either  never  on  any  other  occasion  made  use  of  by  him  on  official 
documents,  or  long  disused.  And  this,  notwithstanding  that  on  the 
very  day  on  which  this  grant  was  signed,  as  well  as  before  and 
afterwards,  his  signature  appears  on  various  documents,  exhibiting 
the  same  uniform  and  striking  peculiarities  visible  throughout  all 
the  records  of  his  official  action. 

We  must  suppose  that  the  sea]  used  on  this  grant  is  genuine, 
though  it  was  not  only  different  from  that  used  on  the  petition  of 
the  eighth  of  November,  and  from  that  on  an  expediente  of  the 
nineteenth  of  December,  but  different  from  any  elsewhere  found  in 
the  archives,  and  this  without  proof  that  there  was  more  than  one 
seal,  and  in  the  face  of  the  declaration  of  the  secretary  that  there 
was  hut  o?ie. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  373 


United  States  v.  Fossat, 


And  finally,  that  a  wretch  has  been  found  with  intelligence  and 
depravity  enough  to  invent  and  swear  to  a  detailed  and  circum- 
stantial account  of  the  fabrication  of  these  documents. 

Such  a  series  of  improbable  hypotheses  I  have  found  it  impossible 
to  believe. 

I  have  given  to  this  case  an  unusual  degree  of  labor  and  atten- 
tion, and  have  endeavored  to  arrive  at  a  just  and  impartial  con- 
clusion. 

My  conviction  is  that  it  ought  not  to  be  confirmed. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  CHARLES  FOS- 
SAT, CLAIMING  THE   RaNCHO  LoS  CaPITANCILLOS. 

Where  a  cause  is  remanded  for  further  proceedings,  involving  additional  proofs, 
the  United  States  are  entitled  to  a  reasonable  time  in  which  to  close  their  tes- 
timony. 

This  was  an  application  by  the  District  Attorney  for  a  continu- 
ance, in  order  to  produce  further  testimony. 

P.  Della  ToRiiE,  United  States  Attorney,  for  the  continuance. 

A.  P.  Crittenden,  against  it. 

This  cause  having  been  set  for  a  hearing  on  this  day,  a  contin- 
uance is  moved  for  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  in  order  that 
further  testimony  may  be  produced.  The  motion  is  strenuously 
resisted  on  the  part  of  the  claimant. 

To  determine  whether  the  Court,  in  the  exercise  of  its  discretion, 
should  grant  it,  the  previous  proceedings  in  the  cause  should  be  ad- 
verted to. 

The  transcript  from  the  Board  of  Commissioners  was  filed  in  this 
Court  on  the  second  of  November,  1854.  A  notice  of  appeal  by 
the  United  States  was  duly  filed  February  20th,  1855. 

The  cause  remained  pending  in  this  Court  until  August  13thj 


374  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Fossat. 

1857 — a  period  of  two  years  and  six  months — when  the  proofs  on 
both  sides  having  been  closed,  it  was  argued  and  submitted. 

No  suggestion  on  either  side  was  then  made  that  the  cause  was 
not  fully  ready  for  hearing,  nor  any  application  for  further  delay, 
nor  was  it  intimated  by  the  parties  that  any  further  testimony  was 
desired  or  could  be  obtained. 

The  decree  of  this  Court  was  signed  on  the  seventeenth  of 
August,  and  an  appeal  having  been  taken  by  the  United  States,  it 
was  heard  by  the  Supreme  Court  at  the  last  term. 

The  mandate  and  opinion  of  the  Supreme  Court  were  filed  in 
this  Court  on  the  seventeenth  of  June,  1858.  By  the  mandate  the 
cause  was  remanded  to  this  Court,  with  directions  to  enter  a  decree 
in  conformity  to  the  opinion  of  the  Supreme  Court. 

By  that  opinion  it  appears  that  in  entering  the  decree,  "  the  ex- 
ternal boundaries  designated  in  the  grant  were  to  be  declared  by 
this  Court  from  the  evidence  on  file,  and  such  other  evidence  as 
may  be  produced  before  it." 

The  mandate  and  opinion  having  been  filed  on  the  seventeenth 
of  June,  a  motion  was  made  on  the  twenty-third  of  June,  that  a 
decree  be  filed  designating  the  external  boundaries,  as  directed  by 
the  Supreme  Court.  On  the  application  of  the  District  Attorney, 
the  hearing  of  this  motion  was  postponed  until  June  30th.  On 
that  day  the  District  Attorney  stated  that  he  desired  to  produce 
further  testimony  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  and  an  order 
was  made  referring  the  cause  to  a  Commissioner  to  take  proofs, 
with  liberty  to  either  party  to  move  to  set  the  cause  for  a  hearing 
in  default  of  due  difigence  on  the  part  of  the  opposite  side.  Under 
that  order  various  depositions  were  taken  on  the  part  of  the  United 
States. 

On  the  third  of  August,  notice  of  a  motion  to  set  the  cause  for  a 
hearing  was  given  by  the  claimant,  and  on  the  ninth  of  August 
the  motion  was  heard.  It  was  thereupon  ordered  by  t\\Q  Court,  the 
United  States  Attorney  consenting  thereto,  as  appears  by  the  order 
and  the  minutes  of  the  Court,  that  the  testimony  on  both  sides  be 
closed  on  the  twenty-first  of  August,  and  the  cause  set  for  a  hearing 
on  the  twenty-fourth  of  August. 

Depositions  were  accordingly  taken  by  the  United  States  on  the 
eighteenth  and  nineteenth  of  August. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  375 

United  States  v.  Fossat. 

On  the  twenty-fourth  of  August  the  District  Attorney  again 
moved  for  further  time  to  take  testimony,  which  was  opposed  by 
the  counsel  for  claimant. 

The  Court,  after  hearing  argument,  ordered  that  further  time 
should  be  allowed,  viz.,  until  the  twenty-eighth,  and  that  the  cause 
be  set  for  a  hearing  on  that  day. 

The  District  Attorney  now  moves  (August  twenty- eighth)  for 
further  time  to  take  testimony. 

He  does  not  state  to  the  Court  the  names  of  any  witnesses  he  pro- 
poses to  examine,  their  number,  nor  the  facts  intended  to  be  estab- 
lished by  them,  that  the  Court  may  judge  of  their  materiality.  He 
declines  to  indicate  any  time  within  which  the  proofs  will  be  closed, 
but  insists  on  the  right  to  examine  witnesses,  so  long  as  it  shall  ap- 
pear to  the  Court  that  he  is  proceeding  therein  without  unnecessary 
delay. 

On  the  part  of  the  claimant  it  is  urged  that  any  further  post- 
ponement of  this  cause  will  in  all  probability  prevent  its  being  heard 
by  the  Supreme  Court  at  its  ensuing  term. 

It  would  be  deeply  regretted  by  the  Court  if  this  litigation,  so 
long  protracted,  and  involving  such  vast  interests,  should  not  at  the 
next  term  of  the  Supreme  Court  be  determined. 

The  question,  however,  for  my  consideration  is.  Have  the  United 
States  had  such  reasonable  time  for  taking  proofs  as  ought  to  be 
allowed  them  ? 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  in  the  opinion  of  the  Supreme  Court, 
this  Court  is  directed  to  "  declare  the  external  boundaries  of  the 
grant  from  the  evidence  on  file,  and  such  other  evidence  as  may 
be  produced,"  etc. 

It  is  clear  that  this  Court  was  bound  to  afford  a  reasonable  op- 
portunity to  take  the  further  evidence  on  which  its  declaration  of 
the  boundaries  was  to  be  founded. 

From  the  thirtieth  of  June,  the  date  of  the  order  directing  the 
evidence  to  be  taken,  the  cause  has  been  prosecuted  by  the  United 
States  with  diligence. 

On  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  of  August  depositions  were 
taken,  and  on  yesterday  and  the  day  before  witnesses  were  ex- 
amined both  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  and  the  claimant. 


376  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


United  States  v.  Fossat. 


Certainly  no  laches  or  unnecessary  delay  can  be  imputed  to  the 
District  Attorney.  He  now  states  that  he  has  other  witnesses, 
whose  testimony  he  will  proceed  to  take  at  once  if  the  opportunity 
be  afforded. 

With  the  strongest  desire  to  bring  this  cause  to  a  termination,  I 
do  not  feel  at  liberty  under  the  directions  given  by  the  Supreme 
Court  to  refuse  the  application. 

If  two  years  and  a  half  was  not  an  unreasonable  time  for  the 
taking  the  original  testimony  in  this  Court,  less  than  two  months 
can  hardly  be  deemed  sufficient  when  the  Supreme  Court  have 
seen  fit  to  send  back  the  cause,  in  effect,  for  further  proofs. 

The  Court  is  assured  by  the  District  Atterney,  in  the  most  em- 
phatic manner,  that  he  has  no  wish  to  delay  the  cause,  but  that  he 
only  desires  time  to  submit  proofs  important  to  the  interests  of  the 
United  States,  and  which  are  in  readiness  to  be  taken.  I  do  not 
feel  at  liberty  to  deny  him  the  opportunity  of  doing  so. 

An  order  must  be  entered  allowing  the  District  Attorney  ten 
days  further  time  to  produce  testimony  in  the  case. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  CHARLES   FOS- 
SAT, CLAIMING  THE   RaNCHO   LoS  CaPITANCILLOS. 

The  southern,  western  and  eastern  boundaries  of  the  tract  granted  to  Justo  Larios 
declared,  leaving  the  northern  boundary  to  be  determined  by  quantity.  The 
former  opinion,  (reported  at  page  211)  with  respect  to  the  southern  boundary, 
manitaincd. 

This  cause  was  remanded  by  the  Supreme  Court,  with  directions 
to  enter  a  decree  in  conformity  with  its  opinion,  reported  in  20 
Howard,  413. 

P.  Della  Torre,  United  States  Attorney,  and  A.  C.  Peachy, 
for  Appellants. 

A.  P.  Crittenden,  for  Appellee. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  377 

United  States  v.  Fossat. 

When  this  case  was  first  submitted  to  this  Court  on  appeal  from 
the  Board  of  Land  Commissioners,  it  was  considered  that  the  four 
boundaries  of  the  tract  were  indicated  with  reasonable  certainty  by 
the  grant  and  accompanying  disefio.  It  did  not  escape  the  obser- 
vation of  the  Court  that  only  three  of  those  boundaries  were  desig- 
nated in  the  grant,  viz.,  the  southern,  the  western  and  the  eastern ; 
but  it  was  thought  that  the  description  of  the  tract  in  the  decree  of 
concession  as  the  "  Canada  de  los  Capitancillos,"  and  the  delinea- 
tion on  the  diseiio  of  the  two  ranges  of  hills  within  which  it  was 
contained,  sufficiently  indicated  the  location  of  the  northern  bound- 
ary, the  mention  of  which  was  omitted  in  the  grant. 

The  Court  was  confirmed  in  this  view  by  the  representation  of 
the  petition,  on  the  disefio,  that  the  tract  delineated  upon  it  was 
of  the  extent  of  one  league,  a  little  more  or  less,  indicating,  as  it 
seemed,  that  he  solicited  not  a  specified  quantity,  but  a  particular 
tract,  the  estimated  area  of  which  he  declared  to  the  Governor. 
When,  therefore,  the  Governor  granted  to  him  the  tract  solicited, 
and  described  it  as  "  of  the  extent  of  one  league,  a  Uttle  more  or 
less,  as  explained  by  the  map,"  it  seemed  to  the  Court  necessary, 
to  carry  into  effect  the  intention  of  the  grantor,  to  confirm  to  the 
claimant  the  tract  delineated  on  the  map,  even  though,  as  antici- 
pated by  the  Governor,  its  extent  might  be  ''  a  little  "  more  than 
one  league  ;  provided  such  excess  did  not  exceed  a  fraction  of  the 
usual  unit  of  measurement  in  colonization  grants,  viz.,  one  league ; 
or  in  other  words,  provided  that  the  quantity  over  and  above  one 
league  was  such  as  might  reasonably  be  deemed  to  have  been  asked 
for  by  the  petitioner  and  granted  by  the  Governor,  under  the  de- 
scription "  a  square  league,  a  little  more  or  less." 

The  clause  in  the  third  condition,  by  which  the  surplus  was  re- 
served to  the  nation,  usually  called  the  sobrante  clause,  was  disre- 
garded by  the  Court,  that  clause  being  a  formula  generally,  and 
almost  invariably  inserted  in  all  grants,  without  reference  to  their 
nature,  and  being  not  unfrequently  found  in  grants  where  all  the 
boundaries  are  distinctly  defined,  and  even  in  grants  where  no 
boundaries  are  mentioned,  but  which  are  for  tracts  of  a  specified 
length  and  breadth,  where  obviously  no  sobrante  can  remain. 

On  the  hearing,  the  location  or  existence  of  a  northern  boundary 


378  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Fossat. 

was  not  brought  in  question,  but  the  discussion  chiefly  if  not  ex- 
clusively turned  upon  the  location  of  the  southern  boundary — the 
right  of  the  Court  to  locate  which  by  its  decree  was  denied  by  the 
attorney  for  the  United  States.  In  that  view,  however,  the  Court 
did  not  coincide ;  but  by  its  decree  it  defined  and  located  the 
southern  boundary,  and  thereby  decided  the  most  important  if  not 
the  only  point  discussed  on  the  hearing. 

The  cause  having  been  appealed  to  the  Supreme  Court,  the 
views  of  this  Court  were  in  some  particulars  found  to  be  erroneous. 

By  the  judgment  of  that  Court  it  is  decided,  not  only  that  in  the 
grant  itself  there  is  no  call  for  a  northern  boundary,  but  that ''  there 
is  no  reference  to  the  diseno  for  any  natural  object  or  other  de- 
scriptive call  to  ascertain  it ;  that  the  grant  itself  furnishes  no  other 
criterion  for  ascertaining  it  than  the  limitation  of  quantity  expressed 
in  the  third  condition,  which  thus  becomes  a  controUing  condition 
in  the  grant."  The  mention  of  quantity  as  "  a  league,  a  little 
more  or  less,"  the  Court  regards  (after  rejecting  the  words  '^  a  little 
more  or  less,"  as  having  no  meaning  in  a  system  of  location  and 
survey  like  that  of  the  United  States)  as  so  explicit  as  to  render 
improper  any  reference  to  the  petition  and  the  diseno,  or  any  in- 
quiry as  to  "  whether  the  name  Capitancillos  had  any  significance 
as  connected  with  the  limits  of  the  grant." 

As  to  the  propriety  of  the  location  of  the  southern  boundary  by 
this  Court,  the  Supreme  Court  expresses  no  opinion,  but  the  grant 
is  confirmed  for  one  league  of  land,  to  be  taken  within  the  southern, 
eastern  and  western  boundaries  mentioned  therein,  and  the  cause 
is  remitted  that  this  Court  may  declare  those  boundaries  from  the 
evidence  on  file  and  such  other  evidence  as  may  be  produced  be- 
fore it. 

As  this  Court  had  already  declared  the  southern  and  only  dis- 
puted boundary  of  the  tract,  the  remanding  of  the  cause,  with  the 
directions  above  stated,  appeared  to  this  Court  to  be  an  instruction 
to  review  and  reconsider  its  opinion  on  that  point,  and  also  to  allow 
further  evidence  to  be  taken  in  relation  to  it.  The  cause  having 
been  originally  heard  with  the  consent  of  both  parties,  and  without 
any  suggestion  that  further  evidence  was  desired  or  attainable,  the 
application  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  for  leave  to  take  further 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  379 

United  States  v.  Fossat. 

testimony  was  resisted  on  the  part  of  the  claimant.  It  seemed, 
however,  to  the  Court,  that  the  directions  of  the  Supreme  Court 
clearly  contemplated  that  such  testimony  should  be  taken,  if  offered, 
and  that  the  obedience  due  from  this  Court  to  the  mandate  of  its 
superior  required  it  to  permit  either  side  to  offer  such  further  tes- 
timony as  might  be  desired.  Additional  testimony  has  therefore 
been  taken,  and  it  now  remains  for  the  Court  again  to  declare  the 
boundaries  as  originally  declared  in  its  former  decree,  or  differently, 
if  on  reconsideration  that  decree  should  appear  to  be  erroneous,  or 
if  the  additional  testimony  is  such  as  to  induce  it  to  change  its 
opinion. 

In  the  opinion  heretofore  delivered,  it  was  observed — "  The  evi- 
dence shows  that  the  tract  called  Capitancillos  is  a  valley  lying 
along  an  arroyo  or  brook.  On  the  southerly  side  extends  a  range  of 
hills,  running  from  east  to  west.  At  their  eastern  extremity,  where 
they  are  intersected  by  the  Alaniitos,  these  hills  attain  considerable 
elevation,  but  they  dechne  in  height  towards  the  west,  where  they 
reach  and  are  turned  by  the  Arroyo  Seco.  Behind  this  ridge  or 
cuchilla  the  main  sierra  or  mountain  chain  raises  itself  to  a  great 
height,  and  is  separated  from  the  ridge  of  Lomas  Bajas,  already 
spoken  of,  by  the  two  streams  mentioned.  These  streams  rise  at 
an  inconsiderable  distance  from  each  other,  and  flowing  in  opposite 
directions,  between  the  Sierra  and  the  Lomas  Bajas,  they  turn  the 
eastern  and  western  extremities  of  the  latter  and  debouch  into  the 
plain.  Upon  the  slopes  of  the  ridge  of  low  hills,  as  well  towards  the 
valley  on  the  north  as  towards  the  streams  behind  it  on  the  south, 
the  best  or  most  permanent  grazing  is  to  be  found,  and  in  this  ridge 
are  situated  the  valuable  quicksilver  mines,  the  existence  of  which 
gives  to  this  inquiry  its  chief  importance." 

To  this  description  it  may  be  added,  that  the  range  of  low  hills 
are  not  throughout  their  w^hole  length  entirely  detached  from  the 
sierra,  but  are  connected  with  it  at  one  point  by  a  spur  or  ridge 
running  nearly  at  right  angles  to  the  general  direction  of  the  sierra 
and  the  lomas.  This  ridge  is  at  its  lowest  point  1100  feet  above 
the  level  of  the  valley.  The  height  of  the  Almaden  Peak  at  the 
eastern  extremity  of  the  lomas  is  about  1500  feet  above  the  level 
of  the  valley,  but  the  lomas  as  they  extend  towards  the  west  dimin- 
25 


380  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Fossat. 

ish  in  height,  and  are  separated  by  various  depressions,  which  per- 
mit easy  access  from  the  valley  on  the  north  to  the  Arroyo  Seco  at 
the  base  of  the  sierra.  The  average  width  of  the  ridge  is  one  mile 
and  four-tenths,  and  though  at  the  Almaden  Peak  the  descent  to 
the  valley  is  abrupt,  yet  further  to  the  west  the  diminished  height 
of  the  hills,  and  the  frequent  depressions  in  the  ridge,  permit  the 
valley  to  be  reached  at  many  points  by  easy  and  gentle  decHvities. 

It  is  proper  to  add  that  after  the  proofs  were  submitted,  the 
Judge,  at  the  suggestion  of  the  District  Attorney,  and  accompanied 
by  that  officer  and  the  representative  of  the  claimant,  visited  the 
premises  in  order  by  personal  inspection  to  become  acquainted  with 
its  topography,  and  to  be  able  more  accurately  to  understand  and 
to  appreciate  the  testimony. 

The  question,  then,  to  be  determined  is — What  is  the  southern 
boundary  designated  in  the  grant  ? 

The  grant  itself  describes  the  land  as  bounded  by  the  "  Sierra ;" 
but  the  question  recurs — What  is  the  natural  object  so  designated  ? 
Is  it  the  main  chain  to  the  south  of  the  Lomas  Bajas,  or  is  it  the 
Lomas  Bajas  themselves  ?  The  natural  meaning  of  the  term 
"  Sierra"  would  seem  to  point  to  a  great  mountain  chain,  rather 
than  to  a  range  of  hills  parallel  to  it  and  separated  from  it,  except 
at  one  point  where  the  two  ranges  are  connected  by  a  narrow 
ridge  or  divide. 

On  the  diseno  presented  by  Larios,  the  Sierra  is  described  as  the 
^'  Sierra  del  Encino."  The  very  remarkable  oak  tree  from  which 
this  name  was  evidently  derived  is  situated  on  the  main  chain  of 
mountains,  and  is  a  conspicuous  object  from  all  parts  of  the  valley. 
That  i\\Q  "  Sierra  "  mentioned  in  the  grant  is  that  on  which  this  tree 
is  situated,  cannot  be  disputed  ;  but  still  the  question  arises — Was 
the  term  '•'■  Sierra  "  or  "  Sierra  del  Encino  "  used  by  the  grantor  to 
designate  the  lofty  chain  of  mountains  on  which  the  oak  tree  is  sit- 
uated, as  distinguished  from  the  Lomas  Bajas  or  lower  ridge  to  the 
north  of  it  ?  Or  did  he  intend  to  include  within  it  both  ranges,  and 
to  apply  the  term  as  well  to  the  Lomas  Bajas  as  to  the  larger  moun- 
tains behind  them  ?  In  a  certain  sense  the  Lomas  Bajas  are  evi- 
dently a  part  of  the  Sierra  with  which  they  are  connected,  as  has 
been  explained ;  but  the  question  is  not  whether  they  form  a  part 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  381 


United  States  v.  Fossat. 


of  or  belong  to  the  Sierra  geologically  or  topographically,  but 
whether  they  were  so  known  and  recognized  and  so  treated  by  the 
Governor  when  he  described  the  tract  as  bounded  by  the  Sierra. 

On  the  part  of  the  claimant,  numerous  witnesses  testify  that  the 
part  of  the  Sierra  Azul  on  which  the  oak  tree  is  situated  is  called 
Sierra  del  Encino,  but  that  the  low  range  of  hills  on  the  south  of  it 
and  separated  from  it  by  the  creeks  was  never  known  as  the  Sierra. 
That  they  were,  until  the  discovery  of  the  mine,  called  Lomas  Bajas, 
and  subsequently  "  Las  Lomas  de  Mina  de  Luis  Chaboya,"  or  "  Cu- 
chilla  de  la  Mina  de  Chaboya."  They  describe  the  range  known 
as  the  "  Sierra"  as  rising  from  the  streams,  and  the  latter  as  run- 
ning between  the  Sierra  and  the  ridge  known  as  the  Cuchilla  de  la 
Mina. 

No  less  than  nine  witnesses,  many  of  whom  have  lived  in  the 
neighborhood  from  twenty  to  forty  years,  testify  to  these  facts,  and 
to  their  testimony  may  be  added  that  afforded  by  the  diseno  of  Eer- 
reyesa,  who  at  the  time  he  presented  it  had  been  established  in  the 
Canada  about  nine  years.  On  this  map  the  two  ranges  of  hills  are 
distinctly  delineated  separated  by  a  broad  valley — far  broader  than 
the  ravine  actually  existing.  The  lower  range  is  inscribed  "  Lomas 
Bajas,"  while  the  upper  is  marked  "  Sierra  Azul ;"  thus  indicating 
that  in  1842  and  at  the  time  when  the  petitions  of  both  Larios  and 
Berreyesa  were  before  the  Governor,  and  before  the  question  had 
any  importance,  a  marked  discrimination  was  made  even  in  the 
rude  diseno  presented  by  the  apphcant  between  the  ridge  of  Lomas 
Bajas,  and  the  Sierra  behind  it. 

Since  the  case  has  been  remanded,  the  testimony  of  three  wit- 
nesses on  this  point  has  been  taken  by  the  United  States. 

Antonio  Sufiol  testifies  that  he  never  heard  of  the  Sierra  del  En- 
cino, nor  of  any  range  of  hills  called  the  "  Cuchill^  de  la  Mina  de 
Luis  Chaboya."  That  the  mouth  of  the  mine  is  in  the  "  Sierra 
Azul."  On  his  cross-examination  he  states  that  the  ridge  has  been 
called  "  Lomas"  or  "  Lomas  Muertas  de  la  Sierra  Azul,"  and  that 
after  the  mine  was  discovered,  ''  we  always  said  the  mine  of  Cha- 
boya which  is  in  the  Sierra  Azul." 

Jos^  Maria  Amador  testifies  that  he  does  not  know  the  Sierra 
del  Encino,  nor  "  La  Cuchilla  de  le  Mina  de  Luis  Chaboya.     That 


382  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Fossat, 

the  mine  is  situated  on  the  "  Lomas  Bajas  de  la  Sierra  Azul."  "  It 
is  in  the  Sierra  Azul  itself.  The  Sierra  descends  regularly  ;  there 
is  no  breach  nor  separation  in  it.  The  mine  is  in  a  low  loma.  It 
is  all  known  as  the  Sierra  Azul,  from  the  foot  to  the  top  of  it." 

Jose  Romero  testifies  that  he  does  not  know  the  Sierra  del  En- 
cino,  nor  the  Cuchilla  de  la  Mina  de  Luis  Chaboya.  That  the 
name  of  the  mountain  on  which  the  mine  is  situated  is  the  "  Sierra 
Azul." 

On  his  cross-examination,  in  reply  to  an  inquiry  as  to  the  name 
of  the  creek  "  which  passes  between  the  Guadalupe  mine  and  the 
Sierra^^^  he  states  its  name  to  be  the  ''  El  Arroyito  del  Corral  del 
defunto  Rafael."  That  he  knows  the  loma  where  the  Guadalupe 
mine  is  situated,  and  the  Sierra  in  which  it  is.  That  "  loma  and 
Sierra  mean  the  same  thing  with  us." 

It  is  unnecessary  to  comment  on  the  testimony  of  these  witnesses, 
for  the  preponderance  of  evidence  is  clearly  against  the  accuracy 
of  their  statements,  or  their  recollection. 

If  then  we  were  to  fix  the  southern  boundary  of  this  tract  by  the 
calls  of  the  grant  alone,  the  evidence  would  leave  no  room  for 
doubt  that  the  grantor  meant  by  the  term  "  Sierra  "  in  the  grant  the 
lofty  chain  of  mountains  on  which  the  oak  tree  is  situated,  and 
which  being  for  the  most  part  covered  with  chemisal,  presents  an 
azure  hue  at  a  distance ;  rather  than  the  lower  and  parallel  ridge 
known  as  the  Lomas  Bajas  or  Cuchilla  de  la  Mina,  and  which  is  for 
the  most  part  covered  with  wild  oats  and  suitable  for  grazing. 

But  the  great  difficulty  in  the  case  is  presented  by  the  diseilo 
which  accompanies  the  expediente  of  Justo  Larios..  Qn  this  diseilo 
a  single  range  of  hills,  inscribed  "  Sierra  del  Encino,"  is  rudely 
delineated  ;  from  this  range  the  two  creeks  are  represented  as  de- 
bouching into  the-plain.  If  this  Sierra  be  the  main  Sierra,  the  Lomas 
Bajas  are  entirely  omitted  on  the  sketch.  I  have  been  much  im- 
pressed with  the  very  able  and  elaborate  argument  on  this  point 
svibmitted  by  the  counsel  who  appeared  for  the  United  States,  as 
also  by  the  testimony  of  many  surveyors  that,  guided  by  this  map 
alone,  and  crossing  the  valley  in  a  southerly  direction,  they  would 
stop  or  fix  the  southern  limit  of  the  tract  at  the  foot  of  the  first  hills 
which  rise  from  the  valley — that  is,  at  the  foot  of  the  "  Lomas 
Bajas." 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  383 

United  States  v.  Fossat. 

It  is  urged  that  the  southern  boundary  as  shown  by  this  disefio 
is  a  line  drawn  at  the  foot  of  the  range  inscribed  "  Sierra  del  En- 
cino,"  and  from  one  creek  to  the  other,  and  not  along  the  course  of 
either.  That  if  the  range  delineated  was  intended  to  represent  the 
main  Sierra,  the  arroyos,  and  especially  the  Seco,  would  have  been 
represented  as  running  below  or  to  the  north  of  it,  and  not  de- 
bouching from  it ;  and  that  the  Lomas  Bajas  would  not  have  been 
omitted. 

It  may  perhaps  be  admitted,  that  if  we  were  to  be  guided  by  the 
disefio  alone,  it  would  not  be  easy  to  avoid  the  conclusion  so 
earnestly  and  ingeniously  pressed  upon  the  Court  in  the  brief  sub- 
mitted by  the  counsel  for  the  United  States.  The  indications,  how- 
ever, afforded  by  the  disefio,  are  not  free  from  all  ambiguity.  On 
that  sketch  the  two  streams  are  represented  as  debouching  from  the 
hills  at  points  situated  on  a  line  nearly  horizontal.  The  map  of 
Lewis,  exhibited  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  shows  that  the 
Arroyo  de  los  Alamitos,  called  on  the  Larios  diseuo  Arroyo  de  los 
Capitancillos,  issues  from  the  foot  hills  or  Lomas  Bajas  at  a  point 
considerably  to  the  north  of  that  where  the  Arroyo  Seco  turns  the 
western  extremity  of  those  hills  and  debouches  into  the  plain.  If  a 
line  then  be  drawn  from  the  point  where  the  Alamitos  debouches, 
to  that  where  the  Seco  turns  the  lomas,  it  would  depart  considerably 
from  a  horizontal  line. 

Again :  The  space  inclosed  between  the  creeks  and  the  Sierra  is 
represented  on  the  Larios  diseno  as  not  quite  twice  as  long  as  it  is 
broad. 

But  if  the  Sierra  on  the  diseno  be  taken  to  mean  the  Lomas  Bajas, 
the  map  of  Lewis  shows  that  the  tract  between  the  Alamitos  and 
the  Seco  on  the  east  and  west,  and  the  Capitancillos  and  the  foot 
of  the  lomas  on  the  north  and  south,  is  about  four  times  as  long  as 
it  is  broad. 

Again  :  The  Arroyo  de  los  Capitancillos  is  represented  on  the 
Larios  diseno  as  running  towards  the  south-east  diagonally  across 
the  valley,  and  then  turning  towards  the  south  and  running  in  a 
southerly  direction  perpendicularly  to  the  valley,  and  nearly  par- 
allel to  the  Arroyo  Seco  for  a  considerable  distance,  until  it  reaches 
the  Sierra.     But  if  the  Sierra  which  it  reaches  was  intended  to  be 


384  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Fossat. 

the  Lomas  Bajas,  it  should  be  drawn  as  meeting  them  while  run- 
ning in  a  south-easterly  or  diagonal  course.  No  part  of  its  south- 
erly or  perpendicular  course  should  be  represented.  The  map  of 
Lewis  shows  that  the  course  of  the  stream  from  a  point  above  or 
near  the  hacienda  is  delineated  on  the  Larios  diseilo  with  tolerable 
accuracy,  and  that  from  that  point  it  flows  in  a  northerly  direction 
perpendicularly  to  the  valley  for  a  considerable  distance,  and  it  is 
only  after  turning  and  leaving  the  lomas  bajas  that  it  takes  a  di- 
rection diagonally  across  the  valley.  If,  then,  the  red  line  drawn 
on  Lewis'  map  as  the  southern  boundary  of  the  tract  were  drawn 
on  the  Larios  diseno  to  the  corresponding  point  of  the  Capitancillos, 
it  would  strike  the  latter  not  far  from  the  letter  "A"  on  that  diseno, 
and  that  portion  of  the  stream  flowing  in  a  north  and  south  direction 
would  be  excluded. 

Again  :  By  looking  on  Lewis'  map  it  will  be  seen  that  the  Arroyo 
Seco,  after  running  in  a  westerly  direction  along  the  base  of  the 
main  Sierra,  and  between  it  and  the  lomas,  on  reaching  the  end  of 
the  latter  makes  a  sudden  bend  to  the  north  and  debouches  into  the 
valley  at  a  point  very  near  the  base  of  the  Sierra ;  in  other  words, 
that  at  this  point  the  flat  or  valley  land  extends  nearly  up  to  the 
base  of  the  main  Sierra.  If,  then,  a  line  be  drawn  from  this  point 
to  the  most  southerly  point  of  the  Arroyo  de  los  Alamitos,  or  Capi- 
tancillos on  the  diseno  of  Larios,  it  would  nearly  coincide  with  the 
base  of  the  Sierra  as  contended  for  by  the  claimant ;  and  would 
moreover  be  almost  a  straight  line,  and  in  this  respect  correspond 
with  the  indications  of  the  diseno  better  than  the  very  sinuous  and 
irregular  line  which  is  found  by  following  the  base  of  the  foot  hills 
which  project  into  the  valley.  For  it  is  to  be  observed  that  neither 
of  the  lines  run  by  Lewis  as  the  southern  boundary  of  the  tract  fol- 
low what  is  claimed  to  be  the  boundary  indicated  by  the  diseno, 
viz.,  the  base  of  the  lomas ;  but  run  upon  the  sides  of  and  over 
those  hills  at  a  considerable  and  apparently  arbitrary  distance  from 
their  base. 

The  slightest  comparison  between  the  diseno  of  Larios  and  a  map 
of  the  country  shows  the  former  to  be  in  many  other  respects  inac- 
curate and  defective.  The  angle  of  the  creeks  at  which  the  eastern 
boundary  commences  is  not  laid  down,  and  the  lomita  which  is  also 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  385 

United  States  v.  Fossat. 

called  for  in  the  description  of  that  line  does  not  appear.  It  is 
therefore  no  very  extravagant  supposition  that  the  lomas  bajas  were 
also  omitted,  particularly  when  the  circumstances  under  which  the 
diseno  was  drawn,  as  detailed  bj  Petronillo  Rios,  are  considered. 

The  foregoing  observations,  I  think,  warrant  me  in  saying  that 
the  diseno  of  Larios  does  not  afford  those  clear,  certain  and  unmis- 
takeable  indications  of  the  location  of  the  southern  boundary  con- 
tended for  by  the  counsel  for  the  United  States. 

But  in  determining  this  question  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  confine 
our  attention  to  the  Larios  diseno  alone. 

The  record  shows  that  Justo  Larios  and  Berreyesa  had  occupied 
different  portions  of  the  Canada  de  los  Capitancillos  for  many  years 
before  the  date  of  their  applications  to  the  Governor  for  their  re- 
spective grants.  Between  them  a  dispute  as  to  their  boundaries 
had  arisen.  Before  the  grant  to  either  was  issued,  they  appeared 
before  Jose  Z.  Fernandez  and  agreed  upon  the  line  which  should 
form  their  common  boundary. 

The  description  of  this  hne,  as  given  in  the  report  of  Fernandez, 
was  inserted  in  both  grants,  and  the  line  was  marked  by  that  officer 
on  the  diseno  of  Berreyesa  "  as  being  the  more  exact."  In  the  grant 
to  Larios  the  eastern  boundary  is  described  as  the  rancho  of  citizen 
Berreyesa,  "  which  has  for  boundary  the  angle,"  etc.,  and  in  the 
grant  to  Berreyesa  his  western  boundary  is  in  like  manner  described 
as  "  the  rancho  of  citizen  Justo  Larios,  which  has  for  boundary  the 
angle,"  etc.  The  eastern  boundary  of  Justo  Larios  is  thus  indi- 
rectly described  in  his  own  grant,  but  directly  in  that  of  Berreyesa  ; 
while  the  western  boundary  of  the  latter  is  in  like  manner  indirectly 
described  in  his  own  grant,  but  directly  in  that  of  Larios.  At  the 
time  of  making  the  grant  the  Governor  had  probably  before  him 
both  disenos,  but  certainly  that  of  Berreyesa,  on  which  the 
boundary  line  described  by  him  in  both  grants  had  been  marked 
by  Fernandez  for  his  information.  In  determining  therefore  the 
boundaries  of  Justo  Larios,  it  seems  to  me  not  only  proper  but 
necessary  to  recur  to  the  grant  to  Berreyesa,  where  alone  the 
boundary  of  Justo  Larios  is  described  as  sucJi,  and  to  the  diseno  of 
Berreyesa,  upon  which  it  was  marked  "  as  being  more  exact." 

The  Governor  did  not  grant  to  Justo  Larios  the  tract  delineated 


386  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Fossat. 

on  his  diseiio,  viz.,  the  land  between  the  Arroyo  Seco  and  that  of 
Capitancillos,  or  a  line  to  the  east  of  the  latter.  He  granted  the 
land  between  the  Arroyo  Seco  and  a  line  drawn  from  the  angle  of 
the  creeks,  passing  by  the  eastern  "  falda  "  of  the  "  lomita  in  the 
centre  of  the  Canada  to  the  Sierra  ;"  and  this  line  was  marked  on 
the  Berreyesa  diseiio,  and  at  a  considerable  distance  to  the  west 
of  the  Capitancillos  or  Alamitos. 

In  declaring  this  boundary,  therefore,  which  was  different  from 
that  solicited  by  Larios  and  indicated  on  his  diseno,  we  are  com- 
pelled to  resort  to  the  diseno  of  Berreyesa,  which  becomes  quoad 
hoc  the  diseiio  to  which  the  grant  refers.  On  the  Berreyesa  diseiio 
the  two  ranges  of  hills  are  rudely  but  unmistakeably  delineated. 
The  first  or  most  northern  are  inscribed  "  Lomas  Bajas,"  while 
the  higher  ridge  to  the  south  is  inscribed  "  Sierra  Azul."  The 
valley  represented  as  lying  between  them,  though  its  width  is 
grossly  exaggerated,  yet  serves  to  indicate  by  that  very  exagger- 
ation the  discrimination  in  the  grantor's  mind  between  the  Sierra 
and  the  Lomas  Bajas. 

The  dotted  line  commencing  at  the  angle  of  the  creeks  is  pro- 
duced across  the  lomas  bajas,  across  the  intermediate  valley,  and 
the  Alamitos  represented  as  flowing  through  it  to  the  base  of  the 
main  Sierra. 

If  this  line  be  the  eastern  boundary  of  Justo  Larios,  as  I  think 
it  must  be  considered,  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  range  of 
mountains  intended  by  the  term  "  Sierra  "  in  his  grant. 

It  is  urged  that  Berreyesa  had  applied  not  only  for  the  Canada 
de  los  Capitancillos,  but  for  all  the  hills  which  pertain  to  it ;  whereas 
Justo  Larios  petitioned  for  a  part  of  the  Canada  alone.  That  there- 
fore in  the  grant  to  Berreyesa,  and  on  his  diseno,  the  line  was  ex- 
tended so  as  to  include  the  low  hills  solicited,  but  that  such  an 
extension  ought  not  to  be  made  in  favor  of  Larios,  who  solicited  the 
Canada  alone. 

This  argument  assumes  that  the  term  Canada  as  used  in  these 
grants  does  not  include  the  low  hills  at  the  foot  of  the  Sierra,  but 
that  it  is  bounded  and  limited  by  them.  But  the  language  of  the 
petition  of  Berreyesa  referred  to  seems  to  convey  the  contrary  idea, 
for  it  speaks  of  the  low  hills  '•''which  belong  or  pertain  to  the  said 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  387 


United  States  v.  Fossat. 


cahaday  He  docs  not  ask  for  the  Canada  and  also  a  portion  of 
the  Sierra,  hut  for  the  Canada  and  the  low  hills  pertaining  to  it.  It 
is  surely  not  reasonable  to  say  that  he  considered  and  asked  for  the 
low  hills  as  not  belonging  to  or  a  part  of  the  Canada  he  solicited. 

Again :  the  Governor,  who  with  respect  to  Berreyesa,  it  is  ad- 
mitted, intended  to  grant  the  low  hills,  describes  the  tract  granted 
to  him  "  as  a  part  of  the  place  known  as  the  Canada  de  los  Capi- 
tancillos,"  thus  showing  that  in  his  apprehension  at  least  the  place 
known  as  the  Canada  de  los  Capitancillos  did  include  the  low  hills 
soHcitod.  In  the  grant  to  Larios  it  is  described  as  the  "  place 
known  by  the  name  of  Capitancillos  " — the  word  Canada  being 
omitted  in  the  grant  though  it  is  inserted  in  the  decree  of  concession. 

Again  :  the  Governor,  confessedly  intending  to  include  within  the 
grant  to  Berreyesa  the  lomas  or  low  hills,  bounds  his  grant  by  the 
Sierra.  With  both  petitions  and  both  disenos  before  him,  and  with 
his  attention  directed  to  the  discrimination  between  the  Sierra  and 
low  hills  belonging  to  the  Canada,  he  nevertheless  uses  the  same 
term  Sierra  in  describing  the  boundary  of  Larios.  Can  we  infer 
that  in  the  grant  to  Berreyesa  he  meant  by  this  term  one  natural 
object,  and  in  that  to  Larios  another  ?  I  think  not.  The  Sierra 
referred  to  in  both  grants  must  be  the  same,  and  as  that  intended 
in  the  Berreyesa  grant  is  unmistakeable,  we  are  enabled  to  fix  with 
corresponding  certainty  the  Sierra  referred  to  in  the  grant  to  Justo 
Larios. 

I  have  given  to  this  case  much  attention.  I  have  endeavored 
to  decide  it  uninfluenced  by  the  previous  opinion  of  this  Court. 
Upon  the  best  consideration  I  have  been  able  to  give  to  the  ques- 
tions involved,  I  have  not  been  able  to  discover  that  that  opinion 
was  erroneous. 

The  remaining  point  to  be  considered  is  as  to  the  form  of  the 
decree. 

In  the  opinion  of  the  Supreme  Court,  (20  How.  426)  it  is  said  : 
"  The  southern,  western  and  eastern  boundaries  of  the  land  granted 
to  Larios  are  well  defined,  and  the  objects  exist  by  which  those 
limits  can  be  ascertained.  There  is  no  call  in  the  grant  for  a  northern 
boundary,  nor  is  there  any  reference  to  the  diseilo  for  any  natural 
object,  or  other  descriptive  call  to  ascertain  it.     The  grant  itself 


388  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Fossat. 

furnishes  no  other  criterion  for  determining  that  boundary  than  the 
limitation  as  expressed  in  the  third  condition.  *  *  jf  \}^q  Umita- 
tion  of  quantity  had  not  been  so  exphcitly  declared,  it  might  have 
been  proper  to  have  referred  to  the  petition  and  diseno,  or  to  have 
inquired  if  the  name  Capitancillos  had  any  significance  as  connected 
with  the  hmits  of  the  tract,  in  order  to  give  effect  to  the  grant. 
But  there  is  no  necessity  for  additional  inquiries.  The  grant  is  not 
affected  by  any  ambiguity.  *  *  The  grant  to  Larios  is  for  one 
league  of  land,  to  be  taken  within  the  southern,  eastern  and  western 
boundaries  designated  therein,  and  which  is  to  be  located  at  the 
election  of  the  grantee  or  his  assigns,  under  the  restrictions  estab- 
lished for  the  survey  and  location  of  private  land  claims  in  California 
by  the  Executive  Department  of  this  Government." 

The  District  Court  is  there  directed  to  declare  the  external  bound- 
aries designated  in  the  grant. 

From  the  foregoing  it  is,  I  think,  evident  that  the  Supreme  Court 
considered  the  southern,  western  and  eastern  boundaries  were  alone 
designated  in  the  grant,  and  that  as  the  limitation  of  quantity  was 
exphcit,  and  there  was  no  ambiguity  in  the  grant,  the  northern 
boundary  was  to  be  determined  by  quantity  alone  ;  and  that  it 
was  "  not  authorised  to  depart  from  the  grant  to  obtain  evidence  to 
contradict,  vary,  or  limit  its  import." 

When,  therefore,  this  Court  has,  pursuant  to  the  directions  of  the 
Supreme  Court,  declared  those  three  external  boundaries,  it  has  de- 
clared "  the  southern,  western  and  eastern  boundaries  of  the  land 
granted  to  Larios,"  and  the  remaining  boundary  is  to  be  ascertained 
by  quantity. 

It  is  urged  on  the  part  of  the  United  States  that  the  league  is 
to  be  taken  within  the  three  boundaries  named,  but  is  not  of  neces- 
sity bounded  by  them  ;  that  its  location  within  them  is  to  be  subject 
to  the  restrictions  established  by  the  executive ;  and  that  the  north- 
ern boundary  of  the  league  is  to  be  determined  by  the  northern 
boundary  of  the  tract  within  which  it  is  to  be  located. 

The  Supreme  Court  undoubtedly  say  that  the  league  is  to  be  lo- 
cated within  the  three  boundaries  mentioned.  But  a  reference  to 
the  preceding  part  of  the  opinion  dispels  any  doubt  which  might  be 
suggested  by  this  expression. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  389 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

It  is  said,  unequivocally,  that  the  southern,  western  and  eastern 
boundaries  of  the  land  granted  to  Larios — not  of  the  tract  within 
which  the  league  granted  to  him  is  to  be  taken — are  well  defined, 
and  the  Supreme  Court  explicitly  declare  that  the  northern  bound- 
ary is  to  be  determined  by  the  limitation  of  quantity  alone.  "  The 
grant  itself  furnishes  no  other  evidence  for  determining  that  bound- 
ary than  the  limitation  of  quantity  as  expressed  in  the  third  con- 
dition. This  is  a  controlling  condition  in  the  grant;"  and  they 
add  that  no  additional  inquiries  to  ascertain  that  boundary  (the 
grant  being  free  from  ambiguity)  are  necessary  or  authorized  by 
law. 

It  seems  to  me  that  the  import  of  this  language  is  unmistakeable, 
and  the  land  granted  to  Larios  must  be  decreed  by  this  Court  to 
be  but  one  league  of  land,  bounded  by  the  three  external  bound- 
aries mentioned  in  the  grant,  as  the  same  are  ascertained  and  de- 
clared in  this  opinion.  The  fourth  or  northern  boundary  to  be 
ascertained  by  quantity,  and  to  be  run  at  the  election  of  the  grantee 
or  his  assigns,  under  the  restrictions  established  for  the  location 
and  survey  of  private  land  claims  in  California  by  the  Executive 
Department  of  the  Government  of  the  United  States. 


THE  UNITED  STATES,  Appellants,  vs.  JOSE  Y.  LIMAN- 
TOUR, CLAIMING   CERTAIN   ISLANDS    IN  AND    NEAR  THE   BaY 

OF  San  Francisco,  and  one  league  of  land  in  Marin 
County.  Same  vs.  Same,  claiming  four  leagues  of  land 
IN  San  Francisco  County. 

These  claims  rejected  on  the  ground  that  the  alleged  grants  are  fraudulent  and 
antedated. 

These  claims  were  both  confirmed  by  the  Board,  appealed  by 
the  United  States,  and  tried  together  before  the  District  Court. 

P.   Della  Torre,  United   States  Attorney,  and   Edwin  M. 
Stanton,  for  Appellants. 


390  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour, 


James  Wilson,  and  Whitcomb,  Pringle  &  Felton,  for  Ap- 
pellees. 

The  claimant  in  these  cases  asks  a  confirmation  of  his  titles,  al- 
leged to  be  derived  from  two  grants  made  to  him  by  Governor 
Micheltorena  in  1843.  The  first  is  for  four  square  leagues  of  land 
situated  in  San  Francisco  county.  The  second  is  for  the  Islands 
of  Los  Farallones,  Alcatraz  and  Yerba  Baena,  and  for  one  square 
league  of  land,  a  little  more  or  less,  at  Point  Tiburon,  in  the  Strait 
of  the  Island  of  Los  Angeles. 

The  two  cases  have  been  heard  together,  and  the  evidence  taken 
has,  by  agreement,  been  made  applicable  to  both.  In  support  of 
the  claim  for  the  four  leagues,  the  following  documentary  evidence 
has  been  produced  :  A  grant  of  four  leagues  in  the  present  county 
of  San  Francisco,  made  by  Manuel  Micheltorena,  and  dated  Feb- 
ruary 27th,  1843.  On  the  margin  of  this  grant  is  an  approval  or 
confirmation,  signed  Bocanegra,  and  dated  April  18th,  1843. 

2d.  A  letter,  signed  by  Micheltorena,  and  dated  at  Los  Angeles, 
January  8th,  1843,  addressed  to  Jos^  Y.  Limantour,  stating «, the 
Governor's  want  of  resources,  soliciting  assistance,  and  offering  to 
compensate  him  by  grants  of  land. 

3d.  A  certificate,  signed  by  Micheltorena  and  by  Jimeno,  Sec- 
retary, dated  December  25th,  1843,  in  which  is  recited  a  letter 
received  by  Micheltorena  from  Bocanegra,  Minister  of  Exterior 
Relations  and  Government  of  Mexico,  and  dated  Mexico,  October 
7th,  1843.  In  this  communication  Bocanegra  acknowledges  the 
receipt  of  an  official  note  by  Micheltorena,  dated  February  24th, 
1843,  enclosing  the  memorial  of  Limantour,  and  he  announces  to 
the  Governor  that  the  Supreme  Government  has  "  been  pleased  to 
grant  to  Limantour  sufficient  leave  to  acquire,  besides  the  property 
which  he  has  already  acquired,  and  which  has  been  recognized  by 
the  Supreme  Government,  further  country,  town,  or  any  other  kind 
of  property." 

4th.  A  copy  of  an  cxpediente,  the  original  of  which  was  found 
by  Vicente  P.  Gomez,  in  the  office  of  the  Recorder  of  Monterey 
county. 

This  expediente  contains  a  petition  of  Limantour,  dated  January 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  391 

United  States  v.  Limantoui'. 

10th,  1843,  a  marginal  order  of  reference,  signed  by  Micheltorena, 
dated  January  11th,  1843,  and  a  decree  of  concession,  dated  Feb- 
ruary 25th,  1843,  two  days  before  the  date  of  the  grant  produced 
in  evidence. 

5th.  An  official  communication  from  Manuel  Jimeno,  written,  as 
it  recites,  by  order  of  the  Governor,  and  addressed  to  William  A. 
Richardson,  Captain  of  the  Port  of  San  Francisco,  and  dated  Jan- 
uary 14th,  1843.  In  this  communication  the  boundaries  of  the 
land  solicited  by  Limantour  are  described,  and  information  relative 
to  those  lands  is  required  of  Richardson,  who  is  also  directed  to 
furnish  a  map. 

6th.  A  letter  from  M.  G.  Vallejo  to  Wm.  A.  Richardson,  and 
dated  November  7th,  1843. 

This  letter  is  produced  by  Richardson,  and  will  hereafter  be 
noticed. 

In  support  of  the  Islands  grant,  the  claimant  has  produced  the 
following  documents : 

A  grant  signed  by  Micheltorena,  and  dated  December  16th, 
1843.  On  the  margin  of  this  grant  is  an  approval  or  confirmation, 
signed  by  Bocanegra,  and  dated  Mexico,  March  1st,  1844. 

2.  An  expediente  from  the  archives,  containing  the  petition  of 
Limantour,  dated  December  12th,  1843,  with  a  marginal  decree 
by  Governor  Micheltorena,  dated  December  14th,  1843,  granting 
the  land  asked  for,  and  \vhich  is  described  on  the  disefio. 

There  has  also  been  produced  by  Manuel  Castafiares,  a  witness 
examined  in  this  Court,  a  copy  of  a  document  purporting  to  be  on 
file  in  the  archives  of  the  Ministry  of  Protection,  Colonization  and 
Industry  of  the  Mexican  Repubhc.  This  document  purports  to  be 
a  minute  or  direction  in  obedience  to  which  the  communication  to 
Governor  Micheltorena,  recited  by  him  in  the  certificate  already 
alluded  to,  was  written.  To  this  minute  is  attached  the  rubric  of 
Bocanegra.  Appended  to  it  is  a  memorandum,  or  advertencia, 
also  rubricated  by  Bocanegra,  which  will  hereafter  be  adverted  to. 

There  have  also  been  produced  two  letters  from  Mariano 
Arista,  President  of  Mexico,  addressed  respectively  to  the  Gov- 
ernor of  this  State,  and  to  the  Land  Commissioners,  in  which  the 
claims  of  Limantour  are  commended  to  their  favorable  considera- 
tion.    These  letters  are  dated  October  2d,  1852. 


392  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

It  is  contended  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  that  all  the  doc- 
uments on  which  the  claimant  relies  are  false  and  forged,  and  that 
they  were  fraudulently  fabricated  long  after  their  pretended  dates, 
and  after  the  acquisition  of  California  by  the  United  States. 

The  charge  is  grave.  It  requires  and  has  received  the  most 
careful  consideration. 

The  first  of  the  claims  now  presented  for  adjudication  is  for  four 
square  leagues  of  land  in  the  present  county  of  San  Francisco.  It 
embraces  the  greater  part  of  the  northern  extremity  of  the  penin- 
sula on  which  this  city  is  situated,  and  it  includes  about  three- 
fourths  of  the  city,  of  an  assessed  value  of  about  115,000,000,  with 
its  wharves,  streets,  markets,  etc. 

The  Islands  claim  comprises  the  Island  of  Yerba  Buena,  which 
lies  opposite  to  and  commands  the  city  and  port  of  San  Francisco ; 

The  Island  of  Alcatraz,  a  small  and  barren  rock  which  commands 
the  entrance  to  the  Golden  Gate,  and  which  is  the  site  of  important 
defensive  works  erected  by  the  United  States  ; 

The  Island  of  the  Farallones,  which  lies  opposite  the  Golden 
Gate,  and  at  some  distance  from  the  mouth  of  the  harbor,  and  on 
which  the  United  States  have  erected  one  of  the  most  important 
light  houses  on  the  coast ;  and  finally. 

The  Point  of  Tiburon,  which  commands  the  strait  between  the 
Island  of  Los  Angeles  and  the  main  land,  by  which  vessels  avoiding 
the  city  of  San  Francisco  are  enabled  to  reach  the  northern  waters 
of  the  Bay  and  its  tributaries. 

In  addition  to  the  claims  under  consideration,  Jose  Y.  Lim.antour 
presented  to  the  Board  of  Commissioners  six  other  claims,  of  which 
he  asked  confirmation. 

These  claims  were : 

One  for  eleven  square  leagues,  called  Laguna  de  Tache. 

One  for  eleven  square  leagues,  called  Lup  Y^omi. 

One  for  eighty  square  leagues,  near  Cape  Mendocino. 

One  for  the  Vineyard  of  San  Francisco  Solano. 

One  for  six  square  leagues,  called  "  Cahuenga." 

One  for  eleven  square  leagues,  called  Cienaga  de  Gabilan,  al- 
leged to  have  been  granted  to  one  Chaves,  and  assigned  to  Liman- 
tour. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  393 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

All  these  last  claims  were  rejected  by  the  Board.  No  appeals 
have  been  prosecuted  in  this  Court,  and  they  appear  to  have  been 
abandoned  by  the  claimant. 

All  these  claims,  and  the  two  now  submitted,  are  in  form  separate, 
but  they  are  in  many  respects  so  closely  connected,  that  those  be- 
fore this  Court  cannot  be  considered  without  reference  to  them. 

The  six  claims  referred  to  embrace  one  hundred  and  thirty-four 
square  leagues  of  land,  or  nine  hundred  and  twenty-four  and  thirty- 
four  one  hundredths  square  miles,  or  five  hundred  and  ninety-four 
thousand  seven  hundred  and  eighty-three  and  thirty-eight  one 
hundredths  square  acres. 

They  all  purport  to  have  been  made  within  a  period  of  about 
sixteen  months,  and  are,  with  the  exception  of  the  grant  for  the 
Vineyard  of  San  Francisco  Solano,  founded  on  the  same  considera- 
tion, viz.,  the  great  services  of  the  grantee  to  the  Department  in 
money  and  goods. 

If  these  immense  and  extraordinary  concessions  were  in  fact  made 
by  Governor  Micheltorena,  and  if  the  advances  in  money  and  goods, 
on  which  they  were  founded  had  in  fact  been  furnished  by  Liman- 
tour, it  would  naturally  be  expected  that  the  records  of  the  Gov- 
ernment, and  the  correspondence  of  its  officers,  would  furnish 
abundant  allusions  to  the  transactions. 

How  far  that  expectation  is  realized  in  this  case  will  subsequently 
appear. 

By  the  decree  of  March  11th,  1842,  the  jealous  and  exclusive 
policy  which  had  prohibited  the  acquisition  of  lands  by  foreigners 
within  the  Mexican  territory  was  in  some  degree  relaxed,  and  they 
were  authorized  to  acquire  such  property  within  the  Central  De- 
partment of  the  Republic.  This  privilege,  however,  did  not  extend 
to  the  Frontier  Departments,  in  which  they  could  acquire  lands 
only  by  express  permission  of  the  Supreme  Governm^ent. 

The  singular  advantages  presented  by  the  bay  and  harbor  of 
San  Francisco  for  commercial  purposes,  had,  long  before  the  date 
of  the  grants  to  Limantour,  attracted  the  attention  not  only  of  for- 
eigners, but  of  the  more  intelligent  of  the  native  population.  So 
early  as  1837,  General  Vallejo  had,  in  a  memoir  or  exposition  ad- 
dressed to  the  Departmental  authorities,  brought  to  their  attention 


394  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

the  great  commercial  advantages  of  the  bay  and  its  tributaries,  and 
had  particularly  remarked  the  importance  of  the  point  of  Tiburon 
and  the  islands  of  Alcatraz  and  Yerba  Buena  for  the  military  de- 
fense of  the  harbor.  The  record  in  this  case  discloses  that  just 
previous  to  the  date  of  these  grants,  a  plan  had  been  proposed  to 
transfer  the  Custom  House  from  Monterey  to  this  port,  and  to  es- 
tablish at  the  latter  naval  arsenals  and  schools. 

The  islands  solicited  by  Limantour,  particularly  those  of  Alcatraz 
and  the  Farallones,  were  almost  without  value  to  a  private  individ- 
ual, if  retained  for  his  own  use. 

When,  therefore,  he  soUcited  and  the  Governor  granted  them,  it 
must  have  been  contemplated  by  both  that  they  would  subsequently 
be  repurchased  by  the  Government,  as  indispensable  to  the  fortifi- 
cations of  the  harbor  ;  for  in  that  way  alone  could  the  grantee  have 
hoped  to  derive  any  advantage  from  their  acquisition. 

The  lands  embraced  in  the  four-league  grant  were  also  in  great 
part  unfit  for  agricultural  purposes,  and  they  could  only  have  been 
desired  by  Limantour  from  their  prospective  value  as  the  site  of  an 
important  town. 

The  case,  then,  as  stated  by  the  claimant,  is  extraordinary  and 
surprising.  That  a  Governor  of  California  should  not  only  have  so 
widely  departed  from  the  ancient  and  traditional  policy  of  his  coun- 
try with  regard  to  foreigners  as  to  make  the  enormous  concessions 
which  have  been  offered  for  confirmation  by  the  claimant,  but  that 
he  should  have  granted  to  him  the  site  of  a  future  town,  upon  the 
most  important  bay  of  the  coast,  and  added  thereto  a  grant  of  all 
the  islands  and  military  positions  which  command  the  approach  or 
the  entrance  to  the  harbor,  strikes  us  at  the  outset  as  a  circum- 
stance astonishing  if  not  incredible.  Among  the  accusations  brought 
against  General  Micheltorena  after  his  overthrow  and  expulsion 
from  the  country,  it  is  strange  that  so  just  and  so  popular  a  ground 
of  animadversion  as  such  grants  as  these  to  a  foreigner  would  have 
afforded,  should  have  been  wholly  omitted.  And  it  is  still  more 
strange  that  the  archives  should  fail  to  show  the  slightest  trace  of 
his  action  on  the  subject,  either  in  his  official  correspondence  with 
the  Supreme  Government,  or  with  his  own  subordinates. 

These  considerations  are  at  least  sufficient  to  justify  us  in  ap- 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  395 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

proaching  the  examination  of  the  evidence  in  support  of  these  claims 
with  surprise  if  not  with  suspicion. 

The  documentary  evidence  in  support  of  the  four-league  grant, 
on  which  the  chief  reliance  is  placed,  consists  of  the  grant  itself  and 
the  expedientes. 

1.  As  to  the  grant. 

The  handwriting  of  the  grant  is  stated  by  Arce,  Prudon  and 
Abrego,  three  of  the  claimant's  witnesses,  to  be  that  of  one  Maciel, 
a  Captain  in  Micheltorena's  command,  who  was  sometimes  employed 
by  him  to  write  in  the  office. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  testified  by  A.  Jouan  and  F.  Jacomet, 
witnesses  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  that  the  writing  is  that 
of  E.  Letanneur,  a  clerk  in  the  employment  of  Limantour  about  the 
year  1852. 

Letanneur  himself  is  proved  to  have  confessed  the  fact,  when  in- 
terrogated before  the  Grand  Jury  of  this  county ;  but  his  subse- 
quent denial  of  it,  when  examined  as  a  witness  for  the  claimant, 
and  the  circumstances  under  which  the  confession  was  made,  de- 
prive it  of  any  great  weight  as  evidence  in  the  case.  But  the  tes- 
timony of  Jouan  and  Jacomet  is  confirmed  by  other  proofs. 

In  the  archives  at  Monterey  is  found  the  record  of  a  criminal 
proceeding,  in  which  a  document  purporting  to  be  written  by  Maciel 
is  found.  The  handwriting  of  this  document  in  no  respect  resem- 
bles that  of  the  grants  in  these  cases. 

Francisco  Sanchez  testifies  that  he  knew  Maciel,  and  has  seen 
him  write.  With  a  scrupulousness  that  adds  force  to  his  testimony, 
he  dechnes  to  say  that  he  remembers  his  handwriting  well  enough 
to  say  that  he  knows  it.  He  states,  however,  that  "  it  appears  to 
him  that  Maciel  did  not  write  the  document ;  that  he  was  an  edu- 
cated man,  and  that  no  Spaniard  would  use  the  word  '  estaeado  ^ 
as  it  is  written  in  that  paper." 

Benito  Diaz  testifies  that  he  has  seen  Maciel's  handwriting  on 
several  occasions,  but  is  not  particularly  acquainted  with  it ;  that 
he  cannot  compare  the  writing  of  the  document  with  that  of  Maciel, 
because  he  does  not  remember  the  latter  sufficiently,  but  from  its 
tenor  and  style,  he  does  not  believe  it  to  be  his ;  that  it  contains 
errors  such  as  Maciel  would  not  have  made,  and  he  particularizes 
26 


396  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Liraantour. 

the  circumflex  over  the  word  "  linea,^^  the  use  of  the  yfordsfunda- 
dero  instead  of  fondeadero,  estacado  for  estacada,  and  podro  for 
podra. 

But  the  most  significant  circumstance  connected  with  the  writing 
of  these  grants  is  the  fact  that  the  Yerba  Buena  grant  and  the 
Islands  grant  are  in  the  same  handwriting,  and  this,  although  one 
is  dated  at  Los  Angeles,  and  the  other  at  Monterey  ten  months 
afterwards,  and  that  among  all  the  archives  found  in  the  Surveyor 
General's  office,  no  writing  similar  to  this  is  found.  If  Maciel,  who 
it  is  admitted  was  only  employed  occasionally  in  the  Governor's 
office,  wrote  these  two  grants  at  different  places,  after  so  long  an 
interval,  with  the  mistakes  which  have  been  mentioned,  and  then 
abruptly  desisted  from  his  labors,  it  was  surely  a  most  singular  co- 
incidence. 

The  expediente  produced  \r\  the  four-league  grant  is  stated  by 
Vicente  Gomez  to  have  been  found  by  him  accidentally  in  the  office 
of  the  Recorder  of  Monterey,  in  the  year  1853.  This  witness  tes- 
tifies that,  at  the  request  of  Jos^  Castro,  he  went  to  the  office  of  the 
Recorder  to  examine  the  papers  in  reference  to  some  property  of 
the  former ;  that  while  so  engaged  he  discovered  the  expediente 
now  produced ;  that  after  finding  it  he  consulted  Jose  Abrego,  who 
advised  him  to  take  a  copy  of  it,  which  he  did. 

W.  I.  Johnson  testifies  that  he  held  the  offices  of  Recorder  and 
Deputy  County  Clerk  in  Monterey  from  April,  1850,  until  June, 
1853,  and  had  charge  of  all  the  archives  or  records  relating  to 
lands  ;  that  pursuant  to  an  Act  of  the  Legislature  of  this  State,  he 
examined  all  the  archives  under  his  charge,  but  that  he  found  no 
such  paper  as  that  discovered  by  Gomez ;  that  if  there  had  been 
any  such  he  thinks  he  would  have  found  it,  and  would  certainly  have 
remembered  it.  He  further  states  that  he  first  heard  that  Liman- 
tour  claimed  a  tract  of  land  in  San  Francisco  from  Gomez,  who  said 
to  him  that  he  believed  Jos^  Abrego  was  concerned  in  it,  and  that 
to  his  (^Gomez's)  knowledge,  it  was  a  fraudulent  claim ;  that  imme- 
diately after  this  conversation  he  again  carefully  examined  the  ar- 
chives relating  to  land  titles,  but  found  no  document  of  the  kind 
now  produced. 

Philip  A.  Roach  testifies  that  in  1850  he,  together  with  Mr. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  897 


United  States  v.  Limantour. 


Ripley,  who  was  elected  Recorder,  were  appointed  a  committee  to 
examine  the  papers  in  the  Recorder's  office,  and  to  separate  those 
which  would  belong  to  the  county  from  those  relating  to  the  city, 
and  that  in  the  discharge  of  those  duties  he  examined  all  the  papers 
in  the  office  ;  that  subsequently  he  examined  them  all  a  second  time 
when  searching  for  an  expediente  relating  to  a  rancho  in  Monterey, 
but  that  on  neither  occasion  did  he  discover  the  document  now  pro- 
duced, and  that  he  does  not  think  such  a  paper  could  have  escaped 
his  attention. 

It  is  admitted  by  Gomez,  and  the  fact  is  unquestionable,  that  the 
proper  and  regular  place  of  custody  of  such  documents  as  that 
found  by  him,  was  the  office  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  not  that 
of  the  Alcalde,  the  records  of  which  were  transferred  to  the  Re- 
corder's office. 

Mr.  Hartnell,  who,  during  the  existence  of  the  military  govern- 
ment in  this  country,  held  the  situation  of  government  translator, 
and  who  made  an  index  of  all  the  California  land  grants  he  could 
find,  testifies  that  he  only  heard  of  the  existence  of  the  grant  to 
Limantour,  by  public  rumor,  in  the  year  1853  ;  and,  finally,  Mr. 
Selim  E.  Woodworth  states  that  he  made  a  general  examination  of 
all  the  archives  in  1850  ;  that  being  desirous  to  ascertain  the  limits 
of  the  pueblo  of  Monterey,  he  examined  every  paper  and  book  in 
the  office  of  the  Alcalde,  and  that  he  did  not  see  among  them  the 
expediente  subsequently  found  by  Gomez. 

To  corroborate  Gomez,  the  claimant  has  taken  the  testimony  of 
Florencio  Serrano.  This  witness  describes  accurately  the  expe- 
diente as  now  produced,  and  states  that  he  saw  it  in  the  archives  of 
his  office  when  he  was  Judge,  in  1848  or  1849.  On  his  cross-ex- 
amination he  states  that  he  never  saw  the  document  or  a  copy  of 
it  from  that  time  until  it  was  exhibited  to  him  in  Court,  December 
8th,  1855. 

The  falsehood  of  this  declaration  is  proved  by  the  testimony  of 
the  County  Recorder,  Mr.  Williams.  This  officer  states  that  on 
the  fifth  of  December  Serrano  called  at  his  office  and  asked  for  the 
petition  of  Limantour  ;  that  he  handed  him  the  expediente,  which 
he  read  attentively ;  that  a  few  days  afterwards  he  read  in  a  news- 
paper the  testimony  given  by  Serrano,  and  at  once  remembered 


398  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 


that  he  had  been  in  the  Recorder's  office,  but  he  could  not  recollect 
when.  On  retiring  for  the  night,  he  remembered  that  he  had  made 
a  charge  in  his  books  for  searching  for  the  paper,  and  that  the  next 
morning,  on  referring  to  his  books,  he  found  the  entry  under  date 
of  December  5th,  1855,  "  Search  for  Limantour  grant,  fifty  cents." 

The  exposure  of  this  gross  falsehood  on  the  part  of  Serrano,  not 
only  destroys  his  credibility  as  to  the  more  material  fact  to  which 
he  testifies,  but  the  attempted  deception  confirms  our  suspicions  as 
to  the  truth  of  the  statement  of  Gomez. 

If  to  the  testimony  of  Johnson,  Roach,  Woodworth  and  Hartnell, 
be  added  the  circumstance  that  Gomez,  immediately  on  discovering 
the  expediente,  suspended  his  search  for  Castro's  papers,  which  he 
never  afterwards  resumed,  and  that  his  statement  with  regard  to 
his  consultation  with  Abrego  is  unconfirmed  if  not  absolutely  con- 
tradicted by  the  latter,  we  are  justified  in  asserting  that  this  claim 
can  derive  little  support  from  documents  discovered  and  produced 
under  circumstances  so  suspicious. 

How  far  any  statement  of  Gomez  is  entitled  to  credit  will  here- 
after more  fully  appear. 

The  expediente  thus  presented  for  consideration  consists,  as  has 
been  stated,  of  a  petition  in  the  writing  of  Limantour,  and  a  marg- 
inal order  and  a  decree  of  concession  in  the  writing  of  Micheltorena. 

The  marginal  order  directs,  in  the  usual  form,  a  reference  "  to 
the  proper  judge,"  and  the  decree  of  concession  recites  that  "  the 
proper  judge  having  taken  all  the  steps  and  investigations,"  etc., 
there  is  granted  to  Jose  Y.  Limantour  the  tract  mentioned  in  his 
petition. 

The  judges  in  the  jurisdiction  of  Yerba  Buena,  in  the  years  1842 
and  1843,  were  Francisco  Sanchez,  First  Alcalde,  and  Jose  de 
Jesus  Noe,  Second  Alcalde. 

If,  then,  as  the  marginal  order  directs,  and  the  decree  of  con- 
cession asserts,  the  petition  of  Limantour  w^as  referred  to  the  re- 
spective judges,  the  reference  should  have  been  to  one  of  these 
officers.  But  no  trace  of  any  report  by  them  exists,  either  in  the 
expediente,  where  such  informes  are  usually  found,  or  in  any  doc- 
ument whatever  in  the  archives.  No^  himself  testifies  that  neither 
during  the  year  1843,  nor  at  any  other  time,  was  he  called  upon 


► 


( 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  399 

United  States  o.  Limantour. 

for  an  informe  in  relation  to  land  near  the  pueblo  of  Yerba  Bucna 
solicited  by  Limantour,  and  that  he  never  had  heard  of  any  claim 
by  Limantour  to  such  lands  until  1852.  Francisco  Sanchez  makes 
the  same  statement,  and  adds  that  in  1844  Limantour  petitioned 
for  lands  near  the  Mission  Dolores,  at  a  place  called  Los  Canutales, 
and  was  refused  because  he  Avas  a  foreigner  ;  that  he  heard  of 
Limantour's  claiming  lands  in  California  in  1852  for  the  first  time. 
The  testimony  of  these  witnesses  is  confirmed  by  the  records  of 
their  official  action. 

On  the  thirteenth  of  May,  1846,  Enrique  Fitch  and  Francisco 
Guerrero  petitioned  for  tAvo  and  one-half  square  leagues  of  land  in 
the  point  of  the  Presidio  of  San  Francisco.  This  land  is  within  the 
limits  of  the  tract  alleged  to  have  been  granted  to  Limantour.  The 
petition  was  referred  to  the  Prefect,  Manuel  Castro,  who  appears  to 
have  referred  it  to  the  First  Justice  of  the  Peace,  Jose  Jesus  Noe. 
The  expediente  contains  the  report  of  the  latter,  stating  that  the 
land  is  vacant :  and  also  the  informe  of  Castro,  advising  the  Gov- 
ernor that  the  land  may  be  granted. 

It  is  also  shown  by  the  expediente  in  the  case  of  Benito  Diaz, 
that  on  the  twenty- fourth  of  May,  1845,  he  petitioned  for  two  square 
leagues  of  land  called  Punta  de  Lobos,  a  great  part  of  which  is  in- 
cluded within  the  limits  of  the  Limantour  grant.  The  usual  refer- 
ence having  been  made  to  the  respective  judge  and  the  military 
commandant,  both  of  those  officers  report  that  the  land  is  vacant, 
and  can  be  granted.  The  judge  who  signs  the  informe  is  Jose  de  la 
Cruz  Sanchez,  and  the  miUtary  commandant  is  Francisco  Sanchez. 

It  thus  appears  that  not  only  no  reference  was  made  of  Liman- 
tour's petition  to  the  respective  judge,  as  is  recited  in  the  decree  of 
concession,  but  that  the  statement  of  the  two  Alcaldes  that  they 
have  never  heard  of  any  grant  to  him  is  corroborated  by  their 
official  reports  as  found  in  the  archives. 

But  the  claimant  contends  that  the  informes  on  which  the  Gov- 
ernor acted  were  obtained  from  Wm.  A.  Richardson  and  Francisco 
de  Haro.  To  establish  this,  Richardson  has  been  examined.  This 
witness  states  that  about  the  latter  part  of  January,  1843,  he  re- 
ceived by  the  hands  of  the  former  magistrate  of  San  Francisco, 
Don  Francisco  de  Haro,  a  communication  from  Manuel  Jimeno, 


400  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

which  he  produces ;  that  at  the  same  time  De  Haro  showed  him  a 
communication  on  the  same  subject  addressed  to  himself ;  that  he 
answered  the  communication  sent  to  himself,  and  prepared  a  map 
which  he  transmitted  with  his  reply  to  the  Governor. 

At  the  time  of  this  transaction  Richardson  was  Captain  of  the 
Port  of  San  Francisco,  but  resided  on  the  northern  side  of  the  bay, 
at  Saucelito.  The  duties  of  that  office  are  detailed  'by  Escriche 
(ap.  verb.  415).  They  relate  chiefly  to  the  visiting  and  inspection 
of  vessels  and  the  prevention  of  smuggling.  They  appear  to  have 
had  no  reference  to  the  granting  of  lands. 

A  reference  therefore  to  Richardson  for  the  information  required, 
was  a  departure  from  the  invariable  practice  of  the  Governor  in 
similar  cases,  and  the  fact  of  such  a  reference  in  this  case,  is  on 
other  grounds  extremely  improbable.  The  archives  show  that  on 
the  very  day  on  which  this  letter  of  Jimeno  purports  to  have  been 
written,  Manuel  Castafiares,  the  Administrator  of  the  Custom  House, 
addressed  a  letter  to  Micheltorena  complaining  of  Richardson's 
official  misconduct,  and  charging  him  with  smuggling,  and  that  in 
about  a  month  thereafter  Richardson  was  removed  from  office. 
There  is  also  produced  by  Richardson  a  letter  signed  by  M.  G. 
Vallejo,  and  dated  November  7th,  1843. 

The  proof  of  the  authenticity  of  these  letters  rests  on  the  testi- 
mony of  Richardson  and  Arce.  General  Vallejo,  though  a  resident 
of  this  Country,  has  not  been  called  to  establish  the  genuineness  of 
the  letter  attributed  to  him,  or  to  explain  the  circumstances  under 
which  it  was  written.  Admitting  it,  however,  to  be  genuine,  its 
language  seems  to  indicate  that  the  writer  was  at  its  date  ignorant 
that  Limantour  had  obtained  any  grants  from  the  Government. 
After  alluding  to  the  fact  that  '•  our  friend,  the  notorious  Liman- 
tour," had  furnished  large  sums  to  Gen.  Micheltorena,  it  adds,  "  if 
he  does  not  intrigue,  at  least  he  endeavors  to  obtain  some  grants 
in  that  (Punta  de  Reyes)  and  other  places,  taking  advantage," 
etc.  Such  language  would  surely  not  have  been  used  had  the 
writer  been  aware  that  a  grant  of  four  leagues  in  the  port  of  San 
Francisco  had  already  been  made  to  Limantour,  and  approved  by 
the  Supreme  Government. 

But  Manuel  Jimeno  himself  has  been  examined  as  a  witness.    It 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  401 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

is  a  significant  circumstance  that  neither  the  letter  produced  by 
Richardson,  nor  the  certificate  of  Micheltorena  reciting  the  commu- 
nication of  Bocanegra,  and  which  purports  to  be  attested  by  Jimeno, 
were  exhibited  to  the  latter. 

In  reply  to  a  question  whether,  on  Governor  Micheltorena's  ar- 
rival in  Monterey,  (in  August,  1843)  he  understood  from  him 
(Gov.  Micheltorena)  that  he  had  made  a  grant  of  lands  to  Liman- 
tour, he  rephes :  "  I  did  not  so  understand  from  Gov.  Michelto- 
rena." He  further  states  that  he  never  heard  Gov.  Micheltorena 
say  that  he  had  granted  lands  to  Limantour  adjoining  the  Pueblo 
of  San  Francisco,  and  that  he  does  not  know  that  such  grant  was 
made.  He  adds,  however,  that  he  recollects  that  as  Secretary  he 
asked  for  information  respecting  lands  petitioned  for  by  Limantour. 
Of  what  authority  he  asked  this  information  he  does  not  recollect. 
Two  of  the  grants  presented  by  Limantour  to  the  Board,  and  which 
were  rejected,  and  have  been  abandoned  by  him,  bear  the  signature 
of  Jimeno  as  Secretary.  They  are  dated  December  4th,  1843, 
and  December  20th,  1844 ;  one  is  for  eleven  square  leagues,  the 
other  for  eighty  square  leagues.  The  certificate  of  Micheltorena, 
attested  by  Jimeno,  before  referred  to,  is  dated  December  25th, 
1843.  The  reasons  for  considering  all  these  documents  antedated 
and  fabricated  will  hereafter  appear.  It  is  sufficient  for  the  present 
to  observe,  that  if  they  are  genuine  and  were  signed  by  Jimeno,  it 
is  impossible  that  he  should  not  have  known  and  remembered  that 
such  extensive  and  extraordinary  grants  had  been  made. 

The  testimony  of  Jimeno  exposes  the  falsehood  of  the  statement 
made  by  Gonzales,  another  of  the  claimant's  witnesses.  Gonzales 
swears  that  soon  after  Micheltorena's  arrival,  he  offered  to  grant  to 
him  land  at  Yerba  Buena ;  that  he  had  received  a  report  on  the 
subject  from  Prefect  Guerrero,  from  whom,  as  from  other  Prefects, 
he  had  required  a  statement  of  the  condition  of  their  lands ;  that 
the  witness  did  not  see  the  iiaforme^  but  saw  on  several  petitions 
the  order  for  an  informe^  directed  to  Guerrero  ;  that  a  short  time 
before  Micheltorena  went  out  of  office,  he  (witness)  presented  a 
petition  for  the  land,  which  was,  by  a  marginal  order,  referred  to 
Jimeno  ;  that  Jimeno  reported  in  writing,  and  that  the  next  day  he 
received  back  his  'petition  from  the  hand  of  Jimeno,  with  a  decree 


402  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

of  the  Governor,  stating  in  substance  that  the  lands  could  not  be 
granted,  as  thej  had  already  been  granted  to  Limantour.  It  is 
unnecessary  now  to  dwell  on  the  various  falsehoods  contained  in  the 
deposition  of  this  witness.  His  statement  that  he  was  Administrator 
of  the  Custom  House  from  1832  to  1834  ;  that  he  received  an  order 
to  remove  the  Custom  House  to  Yerba  Buena ;  that  Guerrero  was 
Prefect ;  that  Micheltorena  removed  to  Monterey  about  a  month 
after  taking  his  oath  of  office,  are  all  disproved  by  the  records  now 
existing  of  the  transactions  of  the  former  Government.  Not  only 
was  Guerrero  never  Prefect,  but  the  records  have  been  searched 
in  vain  for  any  petition  on  which  a  marginal  order  of  reference  to 
him  is  found.  Had  several  such  existed  as  asserted  by  the  witness, 
it  is  nearly  impossible  that  all  could  have  been  lost. 

The  negative  evidence  against  this  grant,  afforded  by  the  fact 
that  Jimeno  did  not  know  of  its  existence,  is  most  important.  The 
records  of  proceedings  under  Micheltorena's  administration,  with 
reference  to  grants  of  land,  show  his  uniform  and  almost  invariable 
habit  of  referring  every  application  to  Jimeno  for  information  and 
advice.  The  intelligence,  the  experience,  and  the  evidently  cautious 
and  circumspect  disposition  of  that  officer,  appear  to  have  given  to 
his  recommendations  great  weight  with  the  Governor,  and  in  every 
instance  his  advice  seems  to  have  been  relied  on  and  imphcitly 
followed  by  that  officer.  To  suppose,  then,  that  Micheltorena, 
without  consulting  Jimeno,  would  have  made  to  a  foreigner  a  grant 
which  Vicente  Gomez  says  was  much  "  spoken  of,  because  it  was  a 
grant  of  a  famous  port ;"  that  after  doing  so  he  never  even  men- 
tioned the  circumstance  to  Jimeno,  and  that  up  to  1853  Jimeno 
remained  in  ignorance  of  the  fact,  is  to  suppose  what  is  almost  im- 
possible. That  Jimeno  could  not  have  forgotten  it  is,  I  think,  ob- 
vious. The  dilemma  is  therefore  presented :  either  he  swore  truly 
that  he  did  not  know  it — in  which  case  Gonzales'  testimony  must 
be  rejected  as  false,  and  Jimeno's  signature  to  Micheltorena's  cer- 
tificate be  regarded  as  forged — or  else,  if  Gonzales'  testimony  be 
true,  and  Jimeno's  signature  genuine,  the  latter  has  sworn  falsely, 
when  he  stated  that  he  did  not  know  that  the  grant  was  made. 
Which  of  these  alternatives  is  to  be  adopted  by  this  Court  will  sub- 
sequently appear. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  403 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

But  an  indirect  confirmation  of  Jimeno's  testimony  is,  however, 
afforded  from  another  source.  Victor  Prudon,  a  witness  for  the 
claimant,  states  that  he  deUvered  and  read  to  Limantour  the  letter 
from  Governor  Micheltorena,  dated  January  8th,  1843,  in  which 
he  solicits  assistance  from  Limantour.  The  witness  then  details  a 
conversation  with  Limantour,  in  which  the  latter  expressed  his  in- 
tention to  ask  for  lands  near  Yerba  Buena,  to  which  the  witness 
objected  that  Governor  Micheltorena  had  no  power  to  grant  lands 
to  a  foreigner.  He  adds  that  he  and  Limantour  made  a  bet  on  the 
subject,  and  Avhen  the  case  was  submitted  to  Micheltorena,  the 
latter  convinced  him  by  showing  him  Santa  Anna's  decree  of  1842, 
allowing  foreigners  to  hold  lands  in  the  Mexican  Repubhc  ;  that  the 
petition  was  then  drawn,  and  he  saw  it  afterwards  with  Michelto- 
rena's  decree  of  concession,  in  the  Secretary's  office. 

If  this  statement  be  true,  the  official  action  of  both  Micheltorena 
and  Jimeno,  in  the  case  of  Sparks,  is  not  easily  accounted  for.  By 
the  expediente  in  that  case,  produced  from  the  archives,  it  appears 
that  on  the  sixth  of  June,  1843,  Sparks,  a  naturalized  Mexican 
citizen,  petitioned  for  land  which  he  had  for  some  time  been  allowed 
to  occupy  provisionally.  The  Prefect,  to  whom  his  petition  was  re- 
ferred, reports  that,  "  as  the  law,  in  speaking  of  strangers,  prohibits 
them  from  acquiring  real  estate  in  the  Republic,  if  they  have  not 
been  naturalized  therein  and  married  with  a  Mexican,  your  Excel- 
lency will  order  that  which  may  be  proper."  On  the  fifth  of  July, 
1843,  Micheltorena  orders  all  the  proceedings  to  be  returned  to  the 
interested  party  to  await  the  very  shortly  expected  arrival  of  the 
new  Constitution  of  the  Republic  ;  "  and  when  he  may  know  that 
it  has  arrived,  he  will  make  his  application  anew." 

On  the  first  of  December,  1843,  Sparks  renewed  his  application  ; 
on  which  Jimeno  reports,  December  5th,  1843,  as  follows  :  "  The 
party  interested  has  not  acquired  the  property  of  the  land  he  pe- 
titions for,  on  account  of  not  being  married  to  a  Mexican,  as  required 
by  the  Constitution  of  1836,  and  although,  by  a  subsequent  decree, 
foreigners  were  allowed  to  acquire  real  estate  in  the  Republic,  ex- 
ceptions are  made  in  the  Frontier  Departments,  which  have  been 
subjected  to  regulations  which  have  not  been  received.  I  believe  it 
would  be  an  act  of  justice  to  grant  the  land  to  the  petitioner,  be- 
cause he  is  an  honorable  man,"  etc. 


404  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

The  land  was,  accordingly,  on  the  fifth  of  December,  ordered  to 
be  granted,  on  the  condition  that  the  grantee  should  have  no  power 
to  sell  it.  The  evidence  afforded  bj  this  expediente  is  important, 
not  only  as  contradicting  or  at  least  discrediting  the  statement  of 
Prudon,  but  as  indicating  the  caution  and  circumspection  of  both 
Micheltorena  and  Jimeno  with  reference  to  grants  to  foreigners.  If 
the  grants  presanted  by  Limantour  be  genuine,  Micheltorena  must 
have  signed  and  Jimeno  attested  on  the  fourth  of  December,  1843, 
(the  day  preceding  the  date  of  the  latter's  report  and  the  order  of 
the  Governor)  a  grant  to  Limantour  for  eleven  square  leagues — 
Laguna  de  Tache — and  on  the  sixteenth  of  December,  Micheltorena 
must  have  granted  to  him  the  islands  of  the  Bay  of  San  Francisco, 
the  paramount  military  importance  of  which  to  the  Government  has 
already  been  noticed ;  and  this,  though  Limantour  was  neither  nat- 
uralized nor  married  to  a  Mexican. 

Had  Micheltorena,  ten  months  before,  granted  to  a  foreigner  the 
port  of  Yerba  Buena,  and  had  he,  on  the  preceding  day,  granted 
to  the  same  foreigner  eleven  leagues  of  land  under  the  authority  of 
the  law  of  ^1842,  the  doubts  of  Jimeno,  his  ignorance  of  the  regula- 
tions prescribed  by  law,  and  the  condition  imposed  by  Micheltorena 
in  the  grant  to  Sparks,  are  inexplicable. 

That  Jimeno  considered  naturalization  as  an  indispensable  requisite 
to  a  petitioner  soliciting  a  grant,  is  further  evident  from  the  expe- 
diente in  the  case  of  Sainsevain. 

The  application  of  this  person  was,  by  Micheltorena,  referred  as 
usual  to  Jimeno,  on  the  twentieth  of  November,  1843.  That  officer 
on  the  same  day  reports  :  ''  Don  Pedro  Sainsevain  is  not  naturalized, 
an  indispensable  requisite  in  order  to  secure  property  in  this  terri- 
tory.'' Sainsevain's  application  was  accordingly  denied,  until,  having 
become  naturalized,  he  obtained  a  title  from  Pio  Pico  in  1846. 

But  there  are  other  parts  of  Prudon's  deposition  which  are  worthy 
of  notice.  He  states,  as  we  have  seen,  that  he  saw  the  petition  of 
Limantour,  with  the  decree  of  concession,  "  in  the  Secretary's 
office." 

On  his  cross-examination,  he  testifies  that  Governor  Micheltorena 
"  had  no  civil  Secretary  until  he  arrived  in  Monterey."  This  state- 
ment, made  evidently  with  the  object  of  accounting  for  the  absence 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  405 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

of  the  attestation  of  the  Secretary  to  either  of  the  grants  now  pre- 
sented, is  shown  to  be  untrue. 

A  list  of  grants  purporting  to  have  been  made  by  Micheltorena 
at  Los  Angeles  in  the  year  1843,  has  been  prepared  from  the 
records  on  file  in  the  Surveyor  General's  office.  Two  of  these, 
dated  January  27th,  1843,  are  attested  by  Jimeno  as  Secretary ; 
the  remainder,  twenty-two  in  number  and  of  various  dates,  from 
January  27th  to  May  20th,  1843,  are  attested  by  Francisco  Arce. 

Arce  himself  states  that  in  January,  1843,  Jimeno  was  Secretary 
of  the  Departmental  Government  of  California,  and  that  he  himself 
acted  as  Secretary  ad  interhn  under  Micheltorena  at  Los  Angeles ; 
and  on  the  twenty-fourth  of  February,  1843,  three  days  previous  to 
the  date  of  the  first  grant  to  Limantour,  a  grant  is  found  in  the 
archives  bearing  his  attestation. 

The  same  facts  are  also  testified  to  by  Rafael  Sanchez,  who  was 
clerk  in  the  office  of  the  Mihtary  Secretary  in  January,  February, 
March  and  April,  of  1843.  This  witness  states  that  Jimeno  was 
appointed  Secretary  in  January,  1843  ;  that  after  acting  as  such  a 
shprt  time,  he  went  to  Monterey,  and  that  Arce,  his  first  clerk, 
acted  as  Secretary  during  his  absence. 

With  regard  to  Richardson,  to  whom,  as  he  says,  the  letter  of 
Jimeno  was  addressed,  it  will  hereafter  appear  that  at  the  time 
when  these  documents  are  supposed  by  the  United  States  to  have 
been  forged,  viz. : — in  June,  1852 — he  was  in  Mexico,  and  in  fre- 
quent communication  with  Limantour.  One  statement,  however, 
contained  in  his  deposition  may  here  be  noticed.  In  reply  to  the 
seventeenth  question,  Richardson  testifies  that  when  he  was  in  Mex- 
ico in  1852,  Limantour  inquired  of  him  as  to  the  condition  of  his 
"  lands  at  Yerba  Buena."  That  upon  his  (witness')  advising  him 
that  he  ought  to  send  on  his  documents  at  once,  as  the  Commission- 
ers were  in  session,  Limantour  replied  that  he  could  present  them 
at  any  time  ;  that  "  they  were  all  substantiated  by  the  proof  of  sig- 
natures by  the  United  States  Consul  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  or  the 
United  States  Minister."  In  a  subsequent  part  of  his  deposition, 
Richardson  states  that  he  left  San  Francisco  on  the  first  day  of 
June,  1852,  and  returned  to  that  city  on  the  twenty-ninth  of  July, 
of  the  same  year,  having  spent  eleven  days  in  the  city  of  Mexico. 


406  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

The  conversation  with  Limantour  must,  therefore,  have  occurred 
some  weeks  prior  to  the  twenty-ninth  of  July. 

It  is  true  that  the  documents  produced  by  Limantour  do  bear  the 
certificates  of  the  United  States  Consul  at  Mexico,  attesting  the 
genuineness  of  the  signature  of  J.  Miguel  Arroyo,  w^ho  himself  cer- 
tifies to  the  genuineness  of  the  signatures  of  Bocanegra  and  Michel- 
torena.  But  unfortunately  the  certificates  of  the  Consul  are  dated 
on  the  second  of  November,  1852,  more  than  three  months  after 
the  date  of  the  alleged  conversation,  in  which,  according  to  Rich- 
ardson, Limantour  stated  that  they  had  already  been  obtained. 

It  is  therefore  evident  that  the  statement  by  Richardson  of  that 
conversation  is  untrue  ;  whether  this  falsehood  was  intentional,  or 
is  the  result  of  an  inaccurate  recollection,  we  will  be  enabled  to 
judge  when  the  evidence  to  prove  the  fraud  attempted  in  these 
cases  has  been  more  fully  considered. 

It  is  stated  by  Prudon  that  the  fact  that  the  lands  had  been 
granted  to  Limantour  near  Yerba  Buena  and  the  Presidio  was 
known,  as  he  beUeves,  to  all  the  principal  persons  in  the  country ; 
and  he  asserts  positively  that  it  was  known  to  Alvarado,  Jose  Cas- 
tro, Manuel  Castro,  Jimeno,  Guadalupe  and  Salvador  Vallejo,  Arce, 
Sanchez,  and  some  others. 

With  respect  to  Jimeno,  we  have  already  seen  that  this  statement 
is  contradicted  by  himself.  We  have  also  seen  by  the  expedientes 
in  the  case  of  Fitch  and  Guerrero,  and  in  that  in  the  case  of  Benito 
Diaz,  that  Manuel  Castro,  as  Prefect,  in  June,  1846,  reported  a 
part  of  the  tract  embraced  within  the  grant  to  Limantour  as  vacant, 
and  that  Jos^  de  la  Cruz  Sanchez  as  Judge,  and  Francisco  Sanchez 
as  Military  Commandant,  made  a  similar  report,  on  the  appUcation 
of  Benito  Diaz  for  a  part  of  the  same  tract. 

Rafael  Sanchez,  who  was  examined  as  a  witness,  states  that  he 
does  not  remember  whether  or  not  Micheltorena  made  any  grants 
of  land  at  Los  Angeles. 

Alvarado  testifies  that  neither  Micheltorena  nor  Limantour  ever 
told  him  that  any  land  near  Yerba  Buena  had  been  granted  to  the 
latter.  He  says,  however,  that  he  heard  that  there  had  been 
granted  or  sold  lands  to  Limantour,  and  that  he  had  solicited  lands 
at  the  North,  but  where  he  did  not  hear. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  407 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

Francisco  Arce,  though  examined  by  the  claimant,  says  nothing 
on  the  subject. 

Guadalupe  and  Salvador  Vallejo  have  not  been  examined  as  wit- 
nesses. 

The  only  witness  who  corroborates  the  statement  of  Prudon  is 
Jose  Castro,  and  he  merely  states  that  Limantour  told  him  in  1845 
that  he  had  no  money,  having  expended  it  all  in  purchasing  lands 
near  the  port  of  San  Francisco.  It  will  hereafter  be  seen  that  in 
1854,  and  long  subsequently  to  the  date  of  the  alleged  grant  of 
lands  near  Yerba  Buena,  Limantour  received  from  the  Mexican 
Government,  in  payment  of  goods  furnished  to  Micheltorena,  more 
than  156,000. 

We  have  thus  far  directed  our  attention  to  various  circumstances 
connected  with  the  grant  and  expediente  in  the  Yerba  Buena  case, 
which  suggest  suspicions  as  to  their  genuineness.  We  are  now  to 
consider  the  evidence  upon  which  the  United  States  rely  as  demon- 
strating, beyond  all  doubt,  the  forgery  of  the  titles  and  the  perjury 
of  the  witnesses  who  have  testified  in  support  of  them. 

The  most  imposing,  and  in  many  respects  most  important  witness 
produced  by  the  claimant  is  Manuel  Castanares.  The  testimony  of 
this  witness  w^as  taken  in  this  Court  after  the  case  was  appealed. 
He  came,  as  he  states,  from  Mexico  to  this  country  for  the  purpose 
of  giving  his  evidence  in  this  cause,  and  by  permission  of  the  Pres- 
ident of  Mexico,  obtained  through  the  intervention  of  the  French 
Minister.  The  official  position  and  the  intelligence  of  this  witness, 
the  clearness  and  precision  of  his  answers,  and  the  circumstances 
under  which  his  testimony  was  given,  are  such  as  would  naturally 
commend  him  to  the  respectful  consideration  of  the  Court.  It  is 
the  discharge  of  a  painful  duty  to  declare  that  his  evidence,  in  al- 
most every  important  particular,  has  been  shown  to  be  false,  by 
proofs  which  amount  to  demonstration. 

In  reply  to  the  thirty-second  question,  Castanares  states  that  the 
paper  on  which  the  grants  in  these  cases  were  written  was  printed 
in  Monterey,  towards  the  end  of  the  year  1842. 

That  by  the  laws  of  Mexico,  paper  was  habilitated  for  a  "  bienio," 
or  period  of  two  years ;  that  paper  had  accordingly  been  printed 
for  the  bienio  of  1842  and  1843,  but  inasmuch  as  by  a  new  law  the 


408  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

prices  and  uses  of  stamped  paper  were  changed,  it  became  neces- 
sary to  have  a  new  impression  in  conformity  with  that  law  for  the 
remaining  year  of  the  bienio  ;  that  the  law  making  this  change  was 
received  by  him  in  the  latter  part  of  November,  or  quite  early  in 
December,  1842,  and  that  he  immediately  took  measures  to  have  the 
new  form  of  stamped  paper  printed  in  conformity  with  it ;  that  he 
sent  down  to  Micheltorena,  by  express,  in  December,  all  the  paper 
that  was  printed,  that  it  might  be  rubricated  by  him  ;  that  all  the 
paper  ordered  for  the  use  of  1843  was  printed  in  the  latter  part  of 
1842,  and  that  the  impression  was  mp.de  at  one  time  ;  that  he  affixed 
his  own  rubric  to  it,  and  sent  it  all  to  the  Governor  at  one  time. 
There  were  about  two  reams,  of  five  hundred  sheets  each.  In  reply 
to  the  one  hundred  and  forty-ninth  question,  the  witness  repeats 
that  all  the  acts  necessary  for  habilitation,  viz. — the  printing,  the  ap- 
plying the  seal  of  the  Custom  House,  and  affixing  his  own  rubric — 
were  performed  by  him  on  the  paper  for  use  in  1843  in  the  year 
1842,  previously  to  his  sending  it  to  Micheltorena,  at  Los  Angeles. 
He  adds  that  the  paper  was  returned  back  from  Los  Angeles  early 
in  the  month  of  March. 

Henry  Cambuston,  by  whom,  as  stated  by  both  Castanares  and 
himself,  the  paper  was  printed,  swears  that  the  paper  on  which  the 
grants  in  these  cases  are  written  was  printed  by  him  in  November 
or  December,  1842  ;  that  he  "  knows  for  a  certainty  that  it  was 
printed  either  in  November  or  December  of  that  year  ;"  that  all  the 
paper  for  1843  was  then  printed — a  form  was  set  up,  and  as  soon 
as  all  the  paper  was  printed,  it  was  taken  down.  The  witness,  in 
reply  to  the  eleventh  question,  states  that  he  knows  positively  that 
the  two  sheets  exhibited  to  him,  (the  grants  in  these  cases)  are 
two  of  the  sheets  printed  by  him  in  November  or  December,  1842, 
for  habilitation  and  use  in  the  year  1843. 

The  importance  of  this  testimony,  if  true,  to  the  claimant  is  evi- 
dent. The  grant  for  four  leagues,  near  Yerba  Buena,  is  on  habil- 
itated paper.     It  is  dated  Los  Angeles,  February  27th,  1843. 

But  the  proofs  of  its  entire  falsity  are  irresistible. 

So  early  as  the  year  1837,  the  necessities  of  the  Mexican  Gov- 
ernment had  suggested  the  poUcy  of  obtaining  a  revenue  from  a 
tax  upon  sealed  or  stamped  paper.     The  law  on  this  subject,  which 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  409 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

was  modified  and  in  part  repealed  by  the  decree  of  April  30th, 
1842,  is  found  in  the  archives,  and  it  has  been  printed  among  the 
exhibits  filed  in  these  cases. 

Bj  the  eighteenth  article  of  that  law,  all  sealed  paper  for  use  in 
the  Departments  was  to  be  transmitted  from  the  Capital  by  the 
Director  General  de  Rentas,  who  was,  by  the  forty-first  article,  re- 
quired to  furnish,  with  the  greatest  promptitude,  the  necessary 
suppUes  to  the  Governors  of  the  various  Departments  for  distribu- 
tion and  consumption.  It  was,  however,  provided  by  that  article 
that  in  cases  of  absolute  necessity,  and  in  the  absence  of  sealed 
paper  from  Mexico,  paper  might  be  "  habilitated^''  by  the  Adminis- 
trator General  and  the  Commissary,  with  the  previous  approbation 
of  the  Governor.  The  habilitation  was  to  be  made  by  placing  on 
the  paper  the  stamp  of  the  office,  and  expressing  therein  the  class 
of  the  seal,  its  value,  the  bienio  to  which  it  belonged,  the  place  and 
date,  together  with  the  signatures  of  the  Administrator  and  Com- 
missary, or  political  authority  in  the  absence  of  the  Commissary. 

No  sealed  paper  from  Mexico  seems  to  have  been  furnished  to 
the  Department  of  the  Californias.  The  paper  was  accordingly 
habilitated  by  the  signatures  of  the  Administrator  of  the  Custom 
House  and  of  the  Governor. 

But  this  habilitation  required,  as  we  have  seen,  the  previous  ap- 
probation of  the  Governor.  Micheltorena  assumed  the  duties  of 
that  office  on  the  thirty-first  of  December,  1842.  It  is  therefore 
evident  that  he  could  not  have  given  directions  for  the  habilitation 
of  paper  in  time  to  permit  it  all  to  be  prepared,  as  stated  by  Cas- 
taiiares,  in  November  or  December  of  that  year. 

When  it  was  in  fact  ordered,  and  at  what  time  the  habilitation 
was  effected,  is  conclusively  shown  by  the  archives  of  the  former 
Government. 

In  those  archives  is  found  the  official  correspondence  of  Michel- 
torena and  Castafiares  with  reference  to  the  habilitation  of  paper 
for  the  year  1843. 

The  first  letter  is  from  Micheltorena,  and  is  dated  Los  Angeles, 
January  9th,  1843.     It  is  as  follows : 

"  The  sealed  paper  provided  by  the  last  law  upon  the  subject 


410  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 


not  having  reached  this  Department,  you  will  proceed  to  habilitate 
as  much  as  may  be  necessary,  and  distribute  the  same  to  the  proper 
parties  for  the  sale  thereof.  Michelt'a." 

This  letter  is  addressed  to  the  Administrator  of  the  Custom 
House  at  Monterey. 

On  the  margin  of  this  order  of  Micheltorena  is  a  note'signed  with 
the  rubric  of  Castanares,  and  dated  January  22d,  1843.  It  is  as 
follows  :  "  Let  the  paper  be  sealed  as  required." 

On  the  fifteenth  of  March,  Governor  Micheltorena  again  writes 
to  Castanares,  referring  to  his  previous  order  of  the  ninth  of  Jan- 
uary, and  stating  that  up  to  that  time,  (viz.  :  March  15th,  1843) 
no  paper  had  reached  Los  Angeles.  He  thereupon  reiterates  his 
order  to  Castanares  to  ''^proceed  immediately  to  its  habilitation, 
and  to  distribute  it  to  the  various  officers,  together  with  a  copy  of 
the  law  on  the  subject,  for  publication,  advising  them  that  the  only 
copy  of  the  law  is  that  which  was  transmitted  to  the  Custom  House." 

On  the  fifth  o^  May,  1843,  Castanares  writes  to  the  Governor 
as  follows  : 

"  Excellent  Senor  : — I  have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  to 
your  Excellency  twenty-five  sheets  of  the  first  class,  forty  of  the 
second,  fifty  of  the  third,  one  hundred  of  the  fourth,  and  one 
hundred  and  fifty  of  the  fifth,  in  order  that  you  may  place  your 
rubric  thereon,  and  order  the  same  to  be  forwarded  to  the  Prefect 
of  the  Second  District,  that  they  may  be  distributed  to  the  Courts 
under  his  jurisdiction,"  etc. 

On  the  sixth  of  June,  1843,  Governor  Micheltorena  acknowleged 
the  receipt  of  the  paper  transmitted  by  Castanares  on  the  eighth  of 
May.     His  letter  is  as  follows  : 

"  With  your  official  communication  of  the  eighth  ultimo,  I  have 
received  twenty-five  sheets  of  the  first  seal,  forty  of  the  second, 
fifty  of  the  third,  one  hundred  of  the  fourth,  and  one  hundred  and 
fifty  of  the  fifth,  the  distribution,  collection  and  account  of  which  I 
have  committed  to  the  charge  of  the  Prefecture  of  the  Second  Dis- 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  411 


United  States  v.  Limantour. 


trict,  for  the  reason  that  the  office  of  the  mihtary  paymaster  has  to 
be  removed. 

"  God  and  Liberty.  Man'l  Michelt'a. 

"  Los  Angeles,  June  6th,  1843. 

"  To  the  Administrator  of  the  Maritime  Custom  House  of  Mon- 
terey." 

In  the  exhibit  in  which  these  letters  are  contained  is  a  large 
number  of  official  communications  relating  to  the  distribution  of  the 
sealed  paper  among  the  various  officers. 

On  the  thirtieth  of  May,  Castafiares  transmits  a  number  of  sheets 
to  the  Justice  of  the  Peace  of  San  Juan  Bautista. 

On  the  twenty-ninth  of  June,  he  transmits  sealed  paper  to  the 
Sub  Prefect  of  San  Jose,  and  on  the  twentieth  of  December  he  in- 
forms the  Governor  that  he  had  forwarded  sealed  paper  to  those 
officers,  in  obedience  to  his  order  of  the  fifteenth  of  March. 

The  distribution  of  the  sealed  paper  transmitted  to  Los  Angeles 
by  Castafiares  on  the  eighth  of  May,  and  the  receipt  which  the 
Governor  acknowledges  on  the  sixth  of  June,  are  also  shown  by  the 
official  correspondence  of  the  Governor  with  the  Prefect,  and  of  the 
latter  with  subordinate  local  authorities. 

On  the  third  of  June  the  Governor  transmits  to  the  Prefect  of 
the  Second  District  all  the  paper  he  had  received  from  Castaiiares. 
On  the  fifth  of  June  the  Prefect  acknowledges  its  receipt.  On  the 
sixth  of  June  the  Prefect  transmits  a  portion  of  it  to  the  Justice  of 
the  Peace  for  distribution.  On  the  seventh  the  Justice  acknowl- 
edges its  receipt.  The  transmission  of  sealed  paper  to,  and  the 
receipt  of  it  by  other  Justices,  are  shown  by  their  official  letters  con- 
tained in  the  same  exhibit. 

The  genuineness  of  all  this  correspondence  is  unimpeached.  The 
signatures  and  rubrics  of  Castafiares  and  Micheltorena  are  proved. 
The  correspondence  is  found  in  the  archives  among  the  records  of 
the  Government,  where  the  official  letters  of  Micheltorena's  admin- 
istration are  preserved. 

But  the  facts  disclosed  by  these  letters  do  not  rest  upon  the  evi- 
dence afforded  by  them  alone. 

All  the  grants  issued  by  Micheltorena  at  Los  Angeles  from  the 
27 


412  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

beginning  of  his  administration  up  to  May  20th,  1843,  have  been 
exhibited  in  evidence.  All  of  them  are  upon  unhabilitated  paper. 
The  only  documents  dated  previously  to  June  6th,  1843,  which  are 
on  habilitated  paper,  are  the  petition  and  the  grant  in  this  case. 

On  the  twenty-second  of  February,  J.  J.  Sparks  presented  his 
petition  for  a  title  on  unhabilitated  paper.  On  the  margin  of  this 
petition  is  an  order  by  Micheltorena,  dated  March  16th,  1843,  in 
which  he  directs  the  petition  to  be  returned  to  the  interested  party 
in  order  that  he  may  renew  his  application  "  as  soon  as  it  is  known 
that  new  sealed  paper  has  arrived  at  Santa  Barbara,  (which  will 
be  issued  soon)  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  duplicating  all  the  docu- 
ments." 

The  petition  seems  to  have  been  accordingly  returned,  and  on  the 
sixth  of  June,  the  very  day  on  which  Micheltorena  acknowledges 
the  receipt  of  sealed  paper  from  Castaiiares,  Sparks  renews  his  ap- 
plication on  habilitated  paper,  and  the  title  was  subsequently  issued 
to  him. 

If  further  proof  on  this  point  could  be  deemed  necessary,  it  is 
found  in  the  testimony  of  Pablo  de  la  Guerra,  a  witness  of  unim- 
peachable character,  who  swears  that  when  he  reached  Monterey 
in  January,  1843,  no  sealed  paper  had  yet  been  printed. 

No  attempt  has  been  made  by  the  claimant  to  rebut  the  proofs 
on  the  part  of  the  United  States  which  have  been  referred  to,  or  to 
reconcile  the  existence  of  the  facts  shown  by  them  with  the  possible 
genuineness  of  the  four-league  grant. 

They  establish '  beyond  all  doubt,  not  only  the  falsehood  of  the 
statements  of  Castanares  and  Cambuston  with  respect  to  the  habili- 
tation  of  paper  for  1843,  but  they  show  that  at  the  date  of  the  pe- 
tition for  the  four-league  grant,  viz.,  January  10th,  1843,  and  at 
the  date  of  the  grant  itself,  viz.,  February  27th,  1843,  the  very 
paper  on  which  they  are  written  was  not  in  existence. 

But  the  statements  of  Castanares  and  Cambuston  with  regard  to 
this  paper  are  shown  to  be  untrue  in  another  respect.  They  both 
swear  positively,  as  we  have  seen,  that  the  paper  for  1843  was  all 
printed  at  the  same  time ;  that  one  impression  was  made  and  the 
form  was  then  taken  down.  Castanares  swears  that  all  the  paper 
so  printed  was  sent  by  him  to  Micheltorena  and  received  back  in 
March,  at  one  time. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  413 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

The  habilitated  paper  for  1843  has  been  subjected  to  a  minute 
examination.  It  is  proved  beyond  all  doubt  by  the  testimony  of 
Truesdell  and  Tennent,  that  the  paper  on  which  these  grants  are 
written  could  not  have  been  printed  on  the  same  form  as  that  on 
which  other  habilitated  paper  for  that  year  was  printed.  It  would 
be  tedious  to  recapitulate  the  numerous  differences  in  the  shape  of 
the  letters,  in  the  length  of  the  words,  in  the  distances  between  the 
words,  between  the  letters,  and  between  the  lines,  on  which  this 
conclusion  is  founded.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  it  is  clearly  estab- 
lished, and  is  visible  on  inspection.  It  serves  to  confirm  the  state- 
ment of  Pablo  de  la  Guerra  that  the  paper  was  printed  during  the 
year  1843,  at  different  times,  and  as  it  was  wanted. 

With  regard  to  the  transmission  of  all  the  sealed  paper  to  Los 
Angeles,  and  its  return  in  March,  1843,  at  one  time,  Castanares' 
statement  is  also  disproved.  None  of  it  was,  as  we  have  seen, 
transmitted  by  him  until  May  8th,  and  the  precise  number  of  sheets 
sent  is  mentioned  in  his  letter  of  that  date,  in  the  reply  of  Michel- 
torena  acknowledging  its  receipt,  June  6th,  1843,  and  in  the  letter 
of  the  Governor  to  the  Prefect  to  whom  he  transmitted  it  for  dis- 
tribution. But  that  Castailares  did  not  send  it  all  to  Los  Angeles 
is  evident  from  the  receipt  of  Salvador  Munras  for  more  than  two 
hundred  sheets  from  the  Custom  House  at  Monterey,  dated  May 
22d,  1843,  and  from  Castailares'  letter  of  May  30th  to  the  Justice 
of  the  Peace  of  Monterey,  transmitting  to  that  officer  a  portion  of 
the  paper. 

The  evidence  is  further  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  a  majority  of 
the  documents  for  the  year  1843,  found  in  Monterey,  are  on  paper 
habilitated  by  Castafiares  alone,  which  is  inconsistent  with  the  sup- 
position that  all  the  paper,  after  being  rubricated  and  sealed  by 
Castafiares,  was  transmitted  to  the  Governor  for  his  rubric,  and  by 
the  latter  returned,  after  being  rubricated,  to  Monterey.  The 
falsehood  of  Castafiares'  statements  on  other  points  in  these  cases 
will  hereafter  be  shown,  in  connection  with  other  branches  of  their 
investigation. 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  evidence  of  fraud  afforded  by  the 
proofs  with  regard  to  the  habilitation  of  the  paper  can  only  be  ap- 
plied to  the  first  grant  to  Limantour ;  his  second  or  Islands  grant 


414  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

being  dated  in  December,  1843,  at  a  time  when  habilitated  paper 
for  that  year  was  undoubtedly  extant. 

We  proceed  to  consider  the  evidence  more  particularly  applicable 
to  the  Islands  grant.  This  grant  bears  date  on  the  sixteenth  of  De- 
cember, 1843.  Among  the  claims  presented  by  Limantour  to  the 
Board  is  that  for  Laguna  de  Tache,  dated  December  4th,  1843. 
This  grant  purports  to  be  made  in  consideration  of  his  valuable 
services  and  loans  in  money  and  effects. 

The  Islands  grant  purports  to  be  made  in  payment  of  duties  ad- 
vanced by  Limantour  on  the  cargo  of  the  "Ayacucho,"  which  was 
shipwrecked ;  and  also  in  consideration  of  services  rendered  by 
him  on  divers  occasions  to  the  Department.  The  petition  found  in 
the  expediente  in  this  case  is  signed  by  Limantour,  and  dated  De- 
cember 12th,  1843. 

It  is  shown  beyond  controversy  that  neither  at  the  date  of  this 
petition,  nor  for  three  months  previously,  had  Limantour  been  in 
California,  and  that  he  did  not  arrive  here  until  July,  1844.  It  ap- 
pears in  proof  that,  in  the  fall  of  1841,  the  "Ayacucho,"  a  vessel  be- 
longing to  Limantour,  was  wrecked  off  the  Punta  de  Reyes.  The 
goods  saved  from  the  wTCck  were  stored  in  the  house  of  Captain 
Richardson,  and  the  greater  part  of  them  were  subsequently  sold 
by  Limantour.  In  the  fall  of  1842,  or  beginning  of  1843,  he  un- 
doubtedly made  considerable  advances  to  Micheltorena,  who  had 
been  furnished  by  the  Government,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  re- 
sources of  the  Department,  with  a  credit  on  the  Custom  House  at 
Mazatlan  for  $8,000  per  month.  Drafts  in  favor  of  Limantour  for 
$10,221  were  accordingly  drawn  by  Micheltorena  on  that  Custom 
House,  which  were,  on  the  twenty-fourth  of  May,  1843,  ordered 
by  the  Supreme  Government  to  be  paid,  as  appears  by  the  official 
letter  of  the  Minister  of  War  and  the  Navy,  communicated  by  the 
Minister  of  the  Treasury  to  the  Treasurer  General  of  Mexico,  and 
by  the  latter  Department  transmitted  to  the  Treasurer  of  the  De- 
partment of  the  Californias,  among  the  records  of  whose  office  it  is 
found. 

It  may  here  be  remarked,  that  so  far  as  it  appears  from  the  ar- 
chives, the  payment  of  this  draft  was  a  complete  settlement  of  all 
accounts  between  Micheltorena  and  Limantour  for  the  advances 
which  had  been  furnished  by  the  latter. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  415 


United  States  v.  Limantour. 


It  is  probable  that  on  the  receipt  of  these  drafts,  Limantour  im- 
mediately proceeded  to  Mexico  to  obtain  the  order  for  its  payment, 
which  we  have  seen  was  issued  on  the  twenty-fourth  of  May,  1843. 

It  is  at  all  events  clear,  if  the  testimony  adduced  by  himself  is  to 
be  relied  on,  that  in  the  months  of  April,  June  and  December  of 
1843,  he  was  in  Mexico. 

The  ratification  or  approval  in  the  margin  of  the  grant  for  two 
leagues  at  Yerba  Buena,  signed  by  Bocanegra,  is  dated  April  18th, 
1843.  This  instrument  states  that,  in  consideration  of  the  services 
rendered  by  Jos^  Y.  Limantour,  the  Supreme  Government  ap- 
proves the  grant  made,  and  it  confirms  the  property  granted,  of 
which  this  document  (that  is,  the  grant)  makes  mention,  which  is 
returned  to  the  jjarty  interested. 

In  the  "  advertencia  "  or  note  appended  to  the  "  acuerdo  "  or 
ratification  produced  by  Castanares,  it  is  stated  that  "  the  Supreme 
Government  has  heretofore  ratified  and  approved  the  grant  made 
to  the  foreigner  Limantour,  setting  down  upon  the  original  titles 
themselves  said  ratification  and  approbation,  and  returning  tliem  to 
to  the  party  interested^  in  the  months  of  April,  June  and  Decem- 
ber of  1843,  and  June  of  1844." 

It  cannot,  I  think,  be  doubted  that  in  these  documents  it  was  in- 
tended to  be  stated  that  the  titles,  with  the  ratifications  appended, 
were  dehvered  to  the  interested  party  in  person  at  the  time  men- 
tioned. No  proofs  have  been  ofi*ered  to  show  that  the  titles  were 
sent  to  Mexico  by  Limantour,  while  he  remained  in  CaUfornia.  If 
such  had  been  the  case,  his  messenger  would  no  doubt  have  been 
produced ;  or,  at  least,  the  fact  that  the  documents  were  sent  to 
Mexico  would  have  been  somewhere  suoi;f]^ested  in  the  evidence. 
But  the  testimony  of  Castanares  and  Keenan,  the  claimant's  own 
witnesses,  places  this  matter  beyond  doubt. 

Castanares  states  that  from  the  middle  of  September,  1842,  when 
he  entered  upon  his  office  as  Administrator  of  the  Custom  House  at 
Monterey,  he  remained  in  that  city  until  the  beginning  of  Decem- 
ber, 1843,  with  the  exception  of  a  trip  to  Los  Angeles,  in  the  early 
part  of  November,  1842.  He  further  states  that  he  sailed  in  the 
bark  "  Clarita"  for  the  port  of  San  Pedro,  in  Upper  California,  and 
that  he  there  embarked  on  the  Trinidad  for  San  Bias. 


416  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

The  records  of  the  Custom  House  show  that  the  "  Clarita  "  sailed 
from  Monterey  with  Don  Manuel  Castailares  and  family  on  board 
as  passengers,  on  the  thirteenth  of  December,  1843.  In  reply  to 
the  one  hundred  and  thirty-ninth  question,  he  says  that  at  the  time 
he  left  Monterey  in  the  "  Clarita,"  Limantour  was  not  in  Monterey, 
nor  had  he  seen  him  there  within  the  three  or  four  months  pre- 
ceding. 

James  Keenan,  a  witness  produced  by  the  claimant  to  prove 
that  in  1843  Limantour  spoke  of  his  having  "  lands  and  property 
in  California,"  states  that  the  conversation  to  which  he  refers  oc- 
curred on  the  road  between  the  city  of  Mexico  and  San  Juan  de  los 
Lagos,  in  the  latter  days  of  November ^  1843. 

To  this  testimony  may  be  added  that  of  Jacob  P.  Leese,  who 
states  that  Limantour  sailed  from  this  country  for  Mexico  early  in 
1843,  in  a  schooner  which  he  had  purchased,  and  which  was  laden 
with  aguardiente,  and  that  he  did  not  return  until  1844. 

But  the  precise  date  of  Limantour's  return  in  California  is  shown 
by  his  own  memorial  to  the  Administrator  of  the  Custom  House,  on 
the  subject  of  the  seizure  of  the  cargo  of  the  "  Joven  Fanita  "  for 
want  of  a  register.  In  that  memorial  he  states  that  on  the  twen- 
tieth of  April,  1844,  he  sailed  from  Mazatlan  in  the  "  Joven  Fanita" 
for  San  Pedro  and  Santa  Barbara,  in  Upper  California  ;  that  on  the 
sixteenth  of  May  he  discovered  that  his  register  had  been  eaten  by 
rats ;  that  on  arriving  at  San  Diego  he  presented  to  the  Captain  of 
the  Port  the  fragments  of  the  register,  and  other  documents.  He 
therefore  asks  the  Administrator  of  the  Custom  House  to  consider 
the  embarrassment  in  which  he  is,  and  to  do  what  may  be  proper 
in  the  premises.  The  various  documents  by  which  this  petition 
was  accompanied — the  order  of  the  Administrator  of  the  Custom 
House — the  certificate  of  the  packages  contained  in  the  cargo — the 
very  fragments  of  the  document  alluded  to  by  Limantour,  and 
finally,  the  order  of  Micheltorena,  by  which  he  took  possession  of 
the  goods,  under  an  engagement  to  account  to  the  Custom  House 
for  their  estimated  value,  in  case  they  should  prove  to  have  been 
Hable  to  confiscation,  are  all  found  in  the  archives,  having  every 
mark  of  genuineness. 

In  the  "  carpeta  "  or  bundle  of  documents  presented  by  Liman- 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  417 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

tour,  with  his  memorial  to  the  Custom  House,  are  the  "  guias  "  or 
certificates  from  one  Custom  House  to  another,  stating  that  the 
proper  duties  have  been  paid  on  the  cargo  therein  referred  to. 

By  these  documents  it  is  shown  that  on  the  twenty-fourth  of  Jan- 
uary, 1844,  Limantour  w^as  at  Colima,  bound  for  San  Pedro,  with 
goods.  On  the  eighth  of  March,  1844,  he  was  at  Guadalajara  with 
goods,  shipped  on  the  "  Joven  Fanita  "  for  the  ports  of  San  Pedro, 
Santa  Barbara  and  Monterey.  This  fact  is  shown  by  an  invoice 
dated  at  Guadalajara  on  the  eighth  of  March,  and  signed  by  himself. 

On  the  twenty-fourth  of  March,  1844,  he  was  at  Tepic  with 
goods,  bound  for  Monterey. 

On  the  twenty-sixth  of  March,  1844,  he  was  at  San  Bias. 

On  the  seventeenth  of  April  he  was  at  Mazatlan,  bound  for  San 
Pedro,  in  the  "  Fanita." 

On  the  sixteenth  of  May,  1844,  he  was  in  latitude  22°  27'  N., 
and  longitude  119*^  44^  W.,  on  the  "  Joven  Fanita,"  bound  for  San 
Pedro. 

On  the  twenty-ninth  of  July,  1844,  he  was  in  Monterey,  soliciting 
the  release  of  his  cargo. 

These  last  two  positions  appear  from  Limantour's  memorial  to 
the  Custom  House,  already  referred  to. 

The  importance  of  establishing  the  position  of  Limantour  at  these 
dates  will  hereafter  appear,  when  we  revert  to  the  testimony  of  Cas- 
tailares  on  the  other  branch  of  the  case. 

It  is  sufficient  here  to  observe,  that  it  is  evident  from  the  state- 
ment of  Castanares  himself,  that  neither  the  petition  of  Limantour 
for  the  Islands  grant,  dated  at  Monterey  on  the  twelfth  of  Decem- 
ber, 1843,  and  which  is  signed  by  himself,  nor  the  grant  for  Laguna 
de  Tache,  dated  December  4th,  1843,  (a  copy  of  which  was  pre- 
sented to  the  Board  for  confirmation,  but  which  was  abandoned 
without  proof)  could  have  been  written  at  the  time  they  bear  date. 

We  now  approach  the  consideration  of  a  part  of  the  evidence  ap- 
plicable to  both  the  grants  under  investigation,  by  which  it  is  urged 
by  the  United  States  the  forgery  of  those  documents  is  conclusively 
established.     The  testimony  referred  to  is  that  which  relates  to  the 

als. 

It  is  proved  by  the  testimony  of  Pablo  de  la  Guerra,  and  Cas- 


418  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 


taiiares  admits  the  fact,  that  there  was  but  one  seal  in  the  Custom 
House  of  Monterey,  which  was  used  on  official  documents.  The 
impressions  of  this  seal  on  documents  of  undoubted  authenticity 
from  the  archives  have  been  compared  with  those  found  on  the 
grants  and  petitions  produced  by  the  claimant  in  the  cases  under 
consideration.  It  is  shown  beyond  all  doubt  that  the  two  classes 
of  impressions  could  not  have  been  made  with  the  same  seal.  It 
would  be  tedious  to  detail  the  numerous  differences  pointed  out  by 
the  witnesses  between  the  genuine  seal  and  that  found  on  the 
grants  in  question.  They  are  readily  detected  on  attentive  exam- 
ination, and  are  distinctly  discernable  in  the  photographic  fac  sim- 
iles which  have  been  exhibited  in  the  cause.  Among  all  the 
impressions,  amounting  to  upwards  of  a  thousand,  of  the  Custom 
House  seals  found  on  various  documents  in  the  archives  for  the 
years  1843  and  1844,  impressions  similar  to  those  on  the  papers  in 
these  cases  are  found  on  but  eight  other  documents. 

An  examination  of  these  documents  will,  however,  show  that  the 
existence  of  these  seals  upon  them  strengthens  the  proof  of  the 
fraud  alleged  in  this  case.  The  first  is  the  expediente  in  the  case 
of  the  alleged  grant  to  Limantour  of  eighty  square  leagues  at  Cape 
Mendocino.  In  this  case  the  original  grant  was  not  produced,  and 
the  claim  was  rejected  by  the  Board,  and  has  been  abandoned  by 
Limantour. 

The  petition  which  is  produced  is  dated  Monterey,  December 
16th,  1844.  It  is  in  the  handwriting  of  Limantour.  The  paper 
on  which  it  is  written  is  habihtated  by  the  rubrics  of  Micheltorena 
and  of  Pablo  de  la  Guerra,  who  was  then  Administrator  of  the 
Custom  House.  Pablo  de  la  Guerra  testifies  that  the  rubric  at- 
tached to  his  name  is  not  his  genuine  rubric,  nor  was  it  placed  there 
by  him. 

We  shall  hereafter  see  that  this  document  is  not  the  only  one 
produced  in  this  case  which  bears  the  forged  rubric  of  Pablo  de  la 
Guerra. 

The  next  is  the  grant  to  Antonio  Chaves.  The  claim  in  this  case 
was  presented  by  Limantour  as  assignee  of  Chaves.  No  proof  of 
any  kind  was  adduced  in  support  of  it.  It  was  accordingly  rejected 
by  the  Board. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  419 


United  States  v.  Limantour, 


The  assignment  under  which  Limantour  claimed  is  dated  at  Mon- 
terey on  the  first  of  February,  1844,  and  is  signed  by  him  as  well 
as  Chaves.  The  latter,  in  his  deposition,  states  that  the  consideration 
for  the  assignment,  viz.  :  five  hundred  dollars,  was  paid  by  Liman- 
tour to  him  on  that  day.  We  have  already  seen  that  Castailares 
swears  positively  that  Limantour  was  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  the 
month  of  February,  1844,  and  that  in  fact  he  was,  on  the  first  of 
February,  neither  there  nor  at  Monterey,  but  on  the  road  between 
Colima  and  Guadalajara.  It  is  therefore  impossible  that  the  assign- 
ment could  have  been  made  on  the  day  it  bears  date ;  or  that 
Chaves'  statement  with  regard  to  the  payment  of  the  money  by 
Limantour  can  be  true. 

The  subscribing  witnesses  to  this  assignment  are  Manuel  Castro, 
Francisco  Pico  and  Francisco  Arce. 

The  third  is  the  petition  of  Castanares  for  "  La  Estrella."  It  is 
in  the  handwriting  of  Limantour.  Castanares  himself,  though  his 
name  is  attached  to  the  petition,  was,  at  the  time  of  his  examina- 
tion, ignorant  of  its  existence. 

He  states  that  he  applied  to  and  obtained  from  Micheltorena  two 
grants — one  for  lands  near  the  beach  of  Juana  Briones,  the  other 
for  a  place  called  "  Las  Mariposas."  In  answer  to  the  one  hundred 
and  eighty-eighth  question,  he  states  positively  that  he  never  ap- 
plied for  any  other  grants  in  California  than  the  two  above  mentioned. 

The  fourth  document  which  bears  the  same  seal  as  that  on  the 
Limantour  papers,  is  the  grant  to  Francisco  Rico  and  Jose  A. 
Castro. 

It  purports  to  be  signed  by  Micheltorena  and  M.  Jimeno,  Secre- 
tary. In  the  index  of  land  grants  made  by  the  latter  officer,  no 
mention  of  this  grant  is  to  be  found,  although  a  grant  made  on  the 
very  day  (Dec.  29th,  1843)  on  which  this  grant  purports  to  have 
been  made  is  duly  indexed.  No  expediente  was  produced  in  this 
case.  The  Court,  though  entertaining  and  expressing  much  doubt 
as  to  its  genuineness,  confirmed  the  claim,  not  conceiving  itself  at 
liberty  to  substitute  its  suspicions  for  the  positive  testimony  of  the 
witnesses  who  testified  to  its  genuineness.  Those  witnesses  were 
Francisco  Arce,  Vicente  P.  Gomez  and  Jose  Y.  Limantour. 

It  is  proper  to  add  that  at  the  time  the  discrepancy  in  the  seals 
had  not  been  discovered. 


420  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

The  fifth  document  is  the  grant  to  Ramon  and  Francisco  de  Haro. 

In  this  case,  which  has  not  yet  been  submitted  for  decision,  the 
deposition  of  Vicente  Gomez  has  been  taken.  This  witness  con- 
fessed on  the  stand  that  the  original  grant  produced  by  the  claim- 
ants had  been  written  by  himself  in  1850.  That  at  that  time  it 
had  neither  the  rubrics  of  Micheltorena  nor  of  Castanares  at  the 
top,  nor  the  signature  of  Jimeno  at  the  bottom.  That  the  signature 
of  Micheltorena  was  then  very  lightly  traced.  He  adds  that  he 
did  this  at  the  request  of  a  Mr.  Ghddon,  but  that  he  had  no  idea 
"  so  ridiculous  a  thing  would  be  presented  in  Court." 

In  order  to  test  the  truth  of  the  witness'  statement,  and  to  ascer- 
tain whether  he  had,  in  confessing  a  forgery,  committed  a  perjury, 
he,  at  the  request  of  claimants'  counsel,  wrote  out  in  the  presence 
of  the  Court  what  was  dictated  to  him.  The  writing  was  found  to 
be  in  all  respects  the  same  as  that  of  the  grant  in  question.  As 
the  proofs  in  this  case  are  not  yet  closed,  any  further  observations 
upon  it  would  perhaps  be  inexpedient. 

The  sixth  document  on  which  the  Limantour  seal  appears  is  the 
grant  to  Modesta  de  Castro.  This  case  was  rejected  by  the  Board 
of  Commissioners.     In  their  opinion,  the  Board  say  : 

"A  paper  purporting  to  be  the  original  grant  is  filed  in  the  case, 
and  the  genuineness  of  the  signatures  of  the  Governor  and  Secre- 
tary appearing  on  it  are  proven  by  the  deposition  of  Jose  Y, 
Limantour. 

"  This  constitutes  the  whole  testirnony  in  the  case.  The  grant 
refers  to  the  original  petition  and  map  mentioned  in  the  expediente 
in  explanation  of  the  boundaries.  These  documents  are  not  pro- 
duced, and  from  the  index  of  the  records  of  the  former  government, 
now  in  the  custody  of  the  Surveyor  General,  it  appears  that  none 
such  exist  in  the  archives." 

After  alluding  to  the  imperfect  description  of  the  land  contained 
in  the  grant,  and  the  absence  of  any  evidence  of  occupation  or  pos- 
session of  the  premises,  the  Board  add  : 

"  But  independently  of  these  considerations,  there  are  a  number 
of  suspicious  circumstances  connected  with  the  grant  itself,  which 
we  should  not  feel  justified  in  passing  over  in  silence.  The  grant 
purports  to  be  made  on  stamped  paper  for  the  years  1844  and 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  421 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

1845.  upon  comparing  it  with  a  number  of  grants  of  undoubted 
genuineness,  made  upon  stamped  paper  for  those  years,  it  is  found 
to  differ  in  so  many  important  particulars  as  to  suggest  strong 
doubts  of  its  authenticity." 

These  differences  are  then  enumerated,  and  the  Board  observe : 

"  The  rubrics  annexed  to  the  certificate  of  habilitation  by  Don 
Pablo  de  la  Guerra  are  so  different  from  those  on  the  genuine 
paper,  as  to  leave  but  little  doubt  of  their  being  simulated." 

The  opinion  concludes  as  follows : 

"  If,  therefore,  the  claim  were  unexceptionable  in  other  respects, 
we  should  not  feel  justified  in  entering  a  decree  of  confirmation  on 
such  a  paper  as  this,  without  very  strong  testimony  in  explanation 
of  the  suspicious  circumstances  connected  with  it.  The  claim  is 
accordingly  rejected." 

The  seventh  document  on  which  this  seal  appears  is  the  petition 
of  Manuel  Castro  for  a  sobrante.  This  petition  states  that  "  in  the 
location  which  was  granted  to  Don  Jose  Limantour,  called  Laguna 
de  Tache,  there  results  considerable  surplus,"  etc. 

This  reference  to  the  grant  to  Limantour  of  Laguna  de  Tache 
might  seem  to  afford  some  proof  of  the  genuineness  of  the  latter. 
This  grant  is  dated  on  the  fourth  of  December,  1843. 

The  petition  of  Castro  purports  to  be  dated  on  the  seventh  of 
December,  and  the  marginal  order  of  Micheltorena  on  the  twelfth 
of  December  of  the  same  year.  Unfortunately,  however,  for  the 
genuineness  of  either  document,  it  appears  that  the  dates  of  both 
the  marginal  order  and  the  petition  have  been  altered  from  October, 
as  they  were  originally  written,  to  December.  The  alteration  is 
obvious  on  inspection.  It  is  plainly  exhibited  in  the  photograph  of 
the  original,  which  has  been  filed.  It  has  been  so  clumsily  effected 
that  the  last  syllables  of  the  word  Octuhre  still  remain,  and  the 
word  is  spelled  Decietubre  instead  of  Deciembre.  The  allusion, 
therefore,  in  the  petition  of  October  7th,  to  a  grant  made  on  the 
fourth  of  December,  must  have  been  prophetic. 

It  ought  to  be  added  that  the  genuineness  of  the  grant  to  Manuel 
Castro  is  testified  to  by  WiUiam  A.  Richardson.  The  claim  was 
rejected  by  the  Board. 

The  last  document  to  be  noticed  is  the  petition  of  Ma.  Antonia 


422  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

Pico  de  Castro.  This  petition,  though  in  the  name  of  M.  A.  Pico 
de  Castro,  is  signed  by  her  son,  Manuel  Castro,  whose  petition  with 
altered  dates,  referring  to  the  grant  of  Laguna  de  Tache,  has  just 
been  noticed. 

No  original  grants  or  expendientes  were  produced  by  Limantour 
in  any  of  the  claims  presented  by  him  for  confirmation,  with  the 
exception  of  the  documents  in  the  cases  now  before  this  Court,  and 
the  expediente  in  the  Mendocino  case  for  eighty  leagues. 

As  none  of  these  documents,  copies  of  which  were  presented  to 
the  Board,  have  been  exhibited  in  this  Court,  it  may  be  presumed 
that  they  bear  the  same  seal  as  the  other  documents  presented  by 
Limantour,  and  that  their  production  would  not  tend  to  establish 
the  genuineness  of  the  latter. 

We  have  thus  examined  in  detail  each  of  the  only  documents  on 
file  in  the  office  of  the  Surveyor  General  which  have  the  same  seal 
as  that  on  the  papers  in  the  cases  under  consideration.  It  is  ap- 
parent that,  so  far  from  affording  proof  of  the  genuineness  of  the 
latter,  the  circumstances  surrounding  them  are  so  suspicious  as  to 
corroborate  rather  than  to  weaken  our  convictions  of  the  fraud  im- 
puted to  the  claimant. 

We  have  seen  that  all  the  grants  presented  by  Limantour  to  the 
Board  for  confirmation  purport,  with  one  exception,  to  have  been 
made  in  consideration  of  his  services  to  the  department  and  of  sup- 
plies furnished  by  him. 

The  evidence  relating  to  the  consideration  on  which  the  two 
grants  submitted  to  this  Court  are  alleged  to  have  been  made,  will 
now  be  adverted  to. 

The  principal  witnesses  relied  on  by  the  claimant  to  prove  that 
the  supphes,  in  payment  of  which  the  grants  are  said  to  have  been 
made,  were  in  fact  furnished  to  Micheltorena,  are  Manuel  Cas- 
taiiares  and  Jose  Abrego. 

Manuel  Castanares  testifies  that  in  the  month  of  February,  1843, 
he  received  at  Monterey  a  letter  from  Governor  Micheltorena,  in- 
forming him  that  he  had  made  a  contract  with  Limantour,  from 
whom  he  had  received  certain  amounts  in  money  and  clothing  for 
his  troops,  and  that  in  payment  thereof  he  had  given  to  Limantour 
drafts  upon  Mazatlan  and  upon  the  general  Treasury  of  Mexico, 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  423 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

"  having  made  to  him  some  grants  of  land.''''  Governor  Michel- 
torena  therefore  requested  the  witness  to  write  to  Santa  Anna,  and 
to  those  ministers  with  whom  he  was  on  terms  of  friendship,  repre- 
senting the  destitute  condition  of  the  Departmental  Government, 
and  recommending  the  payment  of  the  drafts  and  the  approval  of 
the  grants.  He  accordingly  wrote  to  Santa  Anna,  Tornel  and  Bo- 
canegra  as  requested — Santa  Anna  being  at  the  time  President ; 
Tornel,  Minister  of  War;  and  Bocanegra,  Minister  of  External  and 
Internal  Relations  and  of  Government.  Replies  were  received 
from  these  persons  by  the  witness  in  December,  1843,  stating  that 
his  recommendation  had  been  complied  with,  and  in  that  of  Santa 
Anna  it  was  added  that  Mr.  Limantour  had  been  authorized  to 
make  new  loans  to  Micheltorena. 

Castanares  further  states  that  a  few  days  after  his  arrival  in 
Mexico,  on  his  return  from  California,  and  in  the  month  of  Feb- 
ruary, 1844,  Limantour  visited  him  at  his  house  and  handed  him  a 
letter  from  Micheltorena,  in  which  he  (Micheltorena)  informed  the 
witness  that  he  had  received  new  supphes  from  Limantour,  and 
recommended  anew  Mr.  Limantour  to  him  (Castanares)  in  order 
that  he  should  procure  the  payment  of  the  drafts  given  to  Mr. 
Limantour  in  consideration  of  those  supplies — Micheltorena  having 
made  to  him  (Limantour)  new  concessions  of  land  by  virtue  of  the 
authorization  he  had  received  from  the  Mexican  Government. 

The  witness  further  states  that  in  the  year  1844,  and  some  three 
or  four  months  after  his  meeting  with  Limantour  in  February,  the 
latter  showed  him  two  titles  for  land  in  California,  which  he  recog- 
nizes as  those  produced  in  these  cases. 

Such  is  in  substance  the  statement  of  this  witness  with  regard 
to  the  consideration  on  which  these  grants  were  founded. 

The  flagrant  falsehood  of  his  evidence  with  regard  to  the  habili- 
tation  of  paper  for  the  year  1843,  which  has  already  been  exposed, 
might  well  relieve  us  of  the  task  of  examining  this  portion  of  his 
evidence,  resting  as  it  does  on  his  own  unsupported  assertion. 

Some  observations  upon  it,  however,  may  not  be  inappropriate. 
Neither  the  letter  which  he  testifies  he  received  from  Micheltorena 
at  Monterey,  nor  that  handed  to  him  by  Limantour  in  February, 
at  Mexico,  are  produced,  nor  is  Castanares  able  to  state  with  cer- 


424  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

tainty  whether  or  not  they  are  still  among  his  papers  in  Mexico, 
although  he  thinks  it  probable  they  are.  (Answer  to  the  nine- 
teenth interrogatory.) 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  sole  object  of  the  visit  of  this 
witness  to  California  was  to  give  his  evidence  in  these  cases.  If, 
then,  he  had  really  received  letters  from  Micheltorena,  it  is  in- 
credible that  he  should  not  have  searched  for,  and  if  possible, 
brought  them  with  him.  He  could  not  have  been  ignorant  that 
they  would  have  afforded  the  most  decisive  evidence  of  the  genu- 
ineness of  the  claims  he  came  to  establish,  and  would  have  corrob- 
orated his  own  statements  by  the  most  unquestionable  and  satisfac- 
tory proofs.  The  failure  to  produce  these  letters,  and  the  inabihty 
of  the  witness  even  to  state  with  certainty  that  they  still  exist,  in- 
dicating that  he  has  never  searched  for  them  among  his  papers,  is 
a  circumstance  of  itself  sufficient  to  make  us  doubt  the  truth  of  his 
entire  statement. 

We  have  seen  that  Castailares  testifies  positively  that  the  letter 
of  Micheltorena,  informing  him  of  further  concessions  of  land  to 
Limantour,  was  handed  to  him  by  the  latter  in  Mexico,  a  few  days 
after  his  (Castanares')  arrival  from  Cahfornia,  and  that  Limantour 
showed  him  his  titles  some  three  or  four  months  afterwards,  in  the 
same  city.  But  the  documents  presented  by  Limantour  himself  to 
the  Custom  House  at  Monterey,  and  found  in  the  carpeta  attached 
to  his  memorial,  conclusively  establish  that  at  neither  of  the  dates 
mentioned  by  Castanares  could  Limantour  have  been  in  the  city  of 
Mexico. 

On  the  twenty-fourth  of  January  he  was,  as  we  have  seen,  at 
Cohma  ;  on  the  eighth  of  March,  at  Guadalajara  ;  on  the  twenty- 
fourth  of  March,  at  Topic ;  on  the  twenty-sixth  of  March,  at  San 
Bias  ;  on  the  fifteenth  and  seventeenth  of  April,  at  Mazatlan ;  on 
the  sixteenth  of  May,  he  was  at  sea,  and  on  the  twenty-ninth  of 
July,  1844,  he  was  at  Monterey.  I  have  been  unable  to  conjecture 
any  answer  that  can  be  suggested  to  the  proofs  thus  afforded  of  the 
falsehood  of  Castanares'  statements. 

The  second  witness  on  whom  reliance  is  chiefly  placed  by  the 
claimant  to  prove  the  consideration  on  which  these  grants  were 
made,  is  Jose  Abrego. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  425 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

This  witness  states  that  all  the  accounts  between  Micheltorena 
and  Limantour  passed  through  his  hands  as  Commissary  of  the  De- 
partment ;  that  the  form  in  which  the  accounts  were  kept  was  sub- 
stantially as  follows  : 

In  one  column  were  charged  against  Micheltorena  all  the  moneys 
which  came  into  his  hands  to  be  used  as  public  funds.  In  an  op- 
posite column  were  credited  to  him  all  the  disbursements  he  made. 
The  whole  amount  received  by  him  from  Limantour,  at  various 
times,  was  $70,000  or  180,000,  with  which  Micheltorena  stood 
charged  in  the  accounts,  and  he  stood  credited  in  the  account  with 
156,000  or  166,000.  These  credits  were  of  drafts  on  Mazatlan, 
and  perhaps  other  places,  and  there  was  also  a  charge  against 
Limantour,  which  stood  as  a  credit  to  Micheltorena,  of  a  certificate 
for  lands  in  Upper  and  Lower  California,  for  upwards  of  |6,000. 
In  this  certificate,  which  was  to  be  sent  to  Mexico,  it  was  stated 
that  according  to  the  accounts  of  General  Micheltorena,  he  appears 
to  have  received  from  Senor  Limantour  upwards  of  |6,000  for 
certain  lands  granted  to  him  by  the  Departmental  Government,  ac- 
cording to  titles  which  have  been  given  him. 

This  certificate  the  witness  swears  was  signed  by  himself,  by 
Micheltorena's  order,  and  given  to  Limantour  about  a  year  before 
Micheltorena  left  the  country.  It  was  required  by  Limantour,  the 
witness  states,  in  order  that  he  might  obtain  the  approval  of  the 
Supreme  Government  of  Micheltorena's  acts  in  the  premises. 

It  is  proved  beyond  all  doubt  that  nearly  all  the  foregoing  state- 
ments of  Jose  Abrego  are  false. 

Since  his  deposition  was  taken,  the  accounts  of  Micheltorena's 
administration,  with  the  books  of  the  Treasurer,  Abrego,  have  been 
found  in  the  archives.     They  consist  of — 

1.  A  book  of  entries  for  1841. 

2.  A  book  of  entries  Cortes  de  Caja  for  1843. 

3.  Corte  de  Caja  for  1845. 

4.  A  book  of  entries  for  1844. 

5.  A  book  ef  entries  for  1845. 

Also,  two  books  of  entries  by  Jose  Abrego  for  1841  and  1842. 
These  books  have  been  produced  in  Court  by  Mr.  R.  C.  Hopkins, 
the  keeper  of  the  archives.     He  testifies  that  he  has  carefully  ex- 


426  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


United  States  v.  Limantour. 


amined  them,  and  he  states  the  form  in  which  they  were  kept.  It 
appears  from  his  testimony  and  from  inspection  of  the  books  them- 
selves, that  they  were  prepared  in  Mexico,  the  first  and  last  pages 
being  signed  by  the  Director  General  of  "  Rentas,"  and  the  inter- 
mediate ones  by  the  "  ContadorT 
There  were  kept — 

1.  A  book  of  entries  of  amounts  paid  out. 

2.  A  book  in  which  were  entered  the  amounts  received  each 
month,  and  also  the  amounts  paid  out  each  month,  showing  the 
balance  on  hand  at  the  end  of  every  month. 

The  items  or  entries  are  in  every  case  authenticated  by  the  sig- 
nature of  Jose  Abrego,  and  sometimes  by  that  of  the  party  receiving 
the  payment. 

There  were  also  monthly  and  yearly  balance  sheets  made  out 
and  examined  and  audited  by  the  Governor,  or  in  his  absence  by 
some  other  officer. 

Mr.  Hopkins  proceeds  to  state  that  he  has  carefully  examined 
these  books  of  the  Commissary  Department  for  the  years  1842, 
1843,  1844  and  1845,  and  that  they  contain  no  entry  whatever  of 
any  transactions  between  Limantour  and  Governor  Micheltorena. 
That  this  statement  is  accurate,  is  evident  from  the  books  them- 
selves, printed  copies  of  which  have  been  filed  as  exhibits  in  the 
cause.  An  inspection  of  the  books  also  discloses  the  fact  that  the 
description  given  by  Abrego  of  the  mode  of  keeping  the  accounts 
is  untrue. 

It  is  stated  by  him,  as  we  have  seen,  that  there  were  two  columns 
of  items,  the  one  containing  charges  against  Micheltorena  of  moneys 
received  by  him ;  the  other,  credits  to  him  of  disbursements  made 
by  him. 

The  books  show  that  the  accounts  were  kept  in  the  form  of  re- 
ceipts for  disbursements,  which  were  entered  in  the  book  and  num- 
bered. All  the  receipts  from  the  same  party  being  placed  in  a 
carpeta  or  bundle,  on  the  outside  of  which  was  an  abstract  of  its 
contents. 

All  the  accounts  of  Micheltorena's  administration  appear  to  have 
been  handed  to  Abrego  at  one  time,  and  by  him  entered  in  a  book 
on  the  second  of  April,  1845.     In  this  book  the  aggregate  amount 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  427 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

of  the  receipts  or  '' partidas^''  is  stated,  and  attested  hj  the  signa- 
tures of  Michcltorena  and  Abrego.  The  number  of  partidas  or 
separate  entries  is  one  hundred  and  eight,  each  of  which  is  attested 
bj  the  signature  of  Jose  Abrego,  and  refers  to  the  numbered  re- 
ceipts or  vouchers  contained  in  the  corresponding  "  carpeta,"  or 
bundle  of  vouchers. 

These  last  have  also  been  examined.  They  have  been  found  to 
correspond  in  numbers  and  amounts  with  the  entries  or  partidas 
which  refer  to  them. 

Of  the  authenticity  of  these  books  there  can  be  no  doubt. 

They  are  found  among  the  archives  of  the  former  Government. 
They  contain  intrinsic  proofs  of  their  own  genuineness. 

They  are  attested  by  the  frequent  signatures  of  Abrego  and 
Micheltorena.  The  statement  of  accounts  in  them  precisely  cor- 
responds with  the  statement  of  Micheltorena's  accounts  made  by 
Abrego  himself  to  the  Departmental  Assembly,  on  the  fifteenth  of 
April,  1845,  after  the  expulsion  of  Gen.  Micheltorena,  and  which 
is  found  among  the  archives.  And  the  account  as  stated  in  these 
books  is  carried  into  the  "  Corte  de  Caja,"  or  balance  sheet,  made 
out  on  the  first  of  January,  1846,  also  found  in  the  archives.  It  is 
evident  from  inspection  that  there  are  no  entries  of  charges  and 
credits  in  opposite  colum^ns,  as  stated  by  Abrego ;  that  there  is  no 
charge  in  the  books  against  Micheltorena  of  870,000  or  $80,000, 
or  of  any  sum  whatever,  received  by  him  from  Limantour  ;  that 
there  is  no  credit  in  favor  of  Micheltorena  of  156,000  or  160,000 
for  drafts  on  Mazatlan  or  other  places,  or  an  entry  of  or  allusion  to 
any  such  drafts;  that  there  is  no  charge  to  Limantour  and  credit 
to  Micheltorena  of  a  certificate  for  lands  in  Upper  and  Lower  Cali- 
fornia, for  upwards  of  $6,000,  nor  any  allusion  to  any  such  credit, 
charge  or  certificate  ;  that  the  books  contain  no  charge  whatever 
against  Limantour.  And  finally,  that  no  certificate  such  as  that 
mentioned  by  Abrego  in  his  answer  to  the  eighth  question  is  any 
where  contained  in  his  books.  It  further  appears  by  the  testimony 
of  Mr.  Hopkins,  that  no  written  order  from  Micheltorena  to  Abrego, 
directing  him  to  make  out  the  certificate  to  Limantour,  can  be  found 
in  the  archives,  nor  any  mention  or  allusion  to  it ;  that  neither  in 
the  books  of  Abrego,  nor  in  any  book,  paper  or  account  in  the  ar- 
28 


428  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

chives,  can  be  found  any  "  item  crediting  Limantour,"  or  any  item 
crediting  Micheltorena,  as  stated  by  Abrego.  And  finally,  that 
there  is  found  in  the  archives  an  official  letter  of  Garcia  Conde, 
Minister  of  War  and  Marine,  addressed  to  the  Departmental  Treas- 
urer, in  which  he  acknowledges  the  receipt  from  the  latter  of  the 
"  balance  sheet  made  in  the  Treasurer's  office  on  the  first  of  April, 
1845,  showing  the  amount  which  Gen.  Don  Manuel  Micheltorena 
distributed  in  that  Department  while  he  was  Governor  and  Com- 
mandante  General." 

The  demonstration  of  the  falsehood  of  Abrego's  testimony  is  thus 
complete.  It  cannot  be  pretended  that  there  were  other  books  and 
accounts,  which  have  disappeared. 

That  the  Departmental  Treasury  over  which  Abrego  presided 
possessed  no  information  of  the  amounts  received  by  Micheltorena, 
is  evident  from  Abrego's  letter  of  the  fifteenth  of  April,  1845,  to 
the  Departmental  Assembly. 

After  the  expulsion  of  Micheltorena,  an  inquiry  into  the  accounts 
of  his  administration  appears  to  have  been  instituted  by  that  body. 
A  statement  was  therefore  demanded  of  Abrego,  which  he  accord- 
ingly transmits  on  the  fifteenth  of  April,  1845.  This  statement  or 
balance  sheet  precisely  corresponds,  as  has  been  mentioned,  in  the 
items  and  amounts,  with  the  archives ;  aud  in  the  communication 
to  the  Assembly  which  accompanies  it,  Abrego  says : 

"  In  compliance  with  the  wishes  of  the  Most  Excellent  Depart- 
mental Assembly,  I  inclose  the  balance  sheet  formed  by  this  office, 
showing  the  amounts  that  his  Excellency  Bon  Manuel  MicJielto- 
rena  distributed  during  the  time  he  held  the  administration  of  this 
Department,  and  also  a  copy  of  one  of  the  entries  of  the  return 
which  is  found  in  the  books  of  this  Treasury — not  having  any  other 
class  of  documents  or  information  that  can  be  given  relative  to  the 
administration  of  his  Excellency  before  mentioned. 

"  God  and  Liberty.  Jose  Abrego. 

"  Monterey,  April  15th,  1845." 

If  any  explanation  of  the  evidence,  apparently  conclusive  of  the 
falsehood  of  Abrego's  testimony,  were  possible,  it  would  surely  have 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  429 


United  States  v.  Limantour. 


been  offered  by  that  witness^himself.  Since  the  discovery  and  pro- 
duction of  his  books  he  has  not  been  recalled  to  the  stand.  Nor 
has  any  attempt  been  made  to  show  that  there  were  other  books  or 
accounts  in  this  office,  which  in  any  respect  corresponded  to  the 
description  given  by  him  of  the  mode  in  which  they  were  kept,  or 
of  their  contents. 

If  the  audacity  and  hardihood  requisite  to  permit  Abrego  to  make 
statements  susceptible  of  a  refutation  so  complete  and  apparently  so 
easy  should  appear  incredible,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  at  the 
time  his  deposition  was  taken  his  books  had  not  been  discovered. 
They  have  since  been  found  among  a  mass  of  other  documents  at 
the  barracks  of  the  United  States  troops  at  Benicia,  where  they 
have  remained  since  the  conquest  of  the  country — four  boxes  of 
public  papers,  among  which  these  books  were  found,  having  been 
recently  removed  from  Benicia  and  placed  among  the  archives  by 
the  United  States  District  Attorney,  as  detailed  by  that  officer  in 
his  deposition. 

The  same  observations  are  applicable  to  the  testimony  of  Cas- 
tanares ;  for  it  was  not  until  that  witness'  deposition  was  taken  that 
the  documentary  evidence  with  regard  to  the  habilitation  of  the 
paper  was  produced. 

With  such  proofs  of  the  falsehood  of  the  more  material  parts  of 
Abrego's  testimony,  comment  on  other  portions  of  it  might  seem 
superfluous.  It  may  however  be  observed,  that  his  statement  that 
the  certificate  given  by  him  to  Limantour  was  required  by  the  latter 
in  order  to  obtain  the  approval  by  the  Supreme  Government  of 
Micheltorena's  acts,  is  inconsistent  with  the  facts  alleged  by  the 
claimant  to  exist. 

Abrego  st^es  that  this  certificate  was  given  in  Monterey  "  about 
a  year  before  Micheltorena  left " — that  is,  in  1844. 

But  if  the  facts  are  as  contended  for  by  the  claimant,  that  ap- 
proval had  long  since  been  obtained.  The  grant  of  four  leagues  at 
Yerba  Buena  had  been  approved  on  the  eighteenth  of  April,  1843, 
and  the  grant  returned  to  Limantour.  The  Islands  grant  had  been 
approved  on  the  first  of  March,  1844  ;  and  on  the  twenty-fifth  of 
December,  1843,  Micheltorena  had,  at  Limantour's  request,  given 
him  a  certified  copy  of  a  dispatch  from  Bocanegra,  dated  October 


430  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

7th,  1843,  in  which  the  grants  already  made  to  Limantour  were 
confirmed,  and  leave  given  to  him  to  acquire  further  country,  town 
or  other  property. 

In  the  advertencia  or  note  appended  to  the  '^  acuerdo  "  produced 
by  Castailares,  and  bearing  the  rubric  of  Bocanegra,  it  is  stated 
that  "  the  Supreme  Government  has  heretofore  ratified  and  ap- 
proved the  grant  made  to  the  foreigner  Limantour,  setting  down 
upon  the  original  titles  themselves  said  ratification  and  approba- 
tion^ and  returning  them  to  the  party  interested^  in  the  months  of 
April,  June  and  December,  1843,  and  June,  1844." 

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  on  the  claimant's  own  showing,  the 
motive  assigned  for  delivering  the  certificate  to  Limantour  is  absurd. 

The  examination  of  Abrego's  testimony  has  not  only  exposed  the 
perjuries  of  which  that  witness  has  been  guilty,  but  it  has  inci- 
dentally disclosed  the  fact  that  no  trace  whatever  of  the  alleged 
concessions  to  Limantour  is  anywhere  to  be  found  in  the  voluminous 
records  and  documents  now  remaining  in  the  archives  of  the  trans- 
actions of  the  former  Government  of  this  country.  The  pregnant 
and  almost  conclusive  negative  evidence  afibrded  by  these  archives 
will  hereafter  be  adverted  to. 

Before  dismissing,  however,  the  subject  of  the  alleged  considera- 
tion of  these  grants,  a  brief  statement  of  the  facts  as  they  appear  in 
official  documents  found  in  the  archives  may  be  necessary. 

It  is  evident  that  in  the  early  part  of  1843,  Limantour  furnished 
to  Micheltorena  advances  of  money,  perhaps  derived  from  the  sale 
of  the  cargo  of  the  "  Ayacucho,"  which  had  been  wrecked. 

In  the  correspondence  of  Governor  Micheltorena  with  Manuel 
Castanares,  the  first  letter  is  an  order  to  the  latter  "  to  proceed  to 
negotiate  in  the  commercial  market  a  loan  in  money  ft)r  |10,000  or 
fl2,000,  hypothecating  a  certain  percentage  of  the  duties  that 
may  accrue  from  the  vessels  entering  the  port "  of  Monterey. 

This  letter  is  dated  January  9th.  It  is  marked  by  the  clearness, 
decision  and  military  brevity  so  conspicuous  in  all  Micheltorena's 
dispatches,  and  which  so  strikingly  contrast  with  the  suppHant  and 
almost  abject  tone  of  the  letter  addressed  to  Limantour,  and  pro- 
duced by  the  latter,  dated  on  the  preceding  day. 

It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  the  Governor,  who  on  the  ninth 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  431 


United  States  v.  Liraantour. 


transmitted  the  brief  and  peremptory  order  to  Castanares  to  nego- 
tiate a  loan,  could,  on  the  preceding  day,  have  written  the  imploring 
and  almost  piteous  letter  to  Limantour,  so  lavish  of  promises  to  give 
him  '^  drafts  on  Mazatlan,"  ''  contracts  with  the  Department,"  and 
"  to  enable  his  vessel  to  carry  on  a  profitable  trade,"  as  well  as 
grants  of  any  vacant  lands  he  might  select,  and  begging  him  to 
"  do  him  the  favor  to  call  and  see  him,  that  he  might  have  the 
honor  of  conversing  with  him." 

Whether  the  advances  made  by  Limantour  were  obtained  by 
Castaiiares,  in  compliance  with  Micheltorena's  letter  of  the  ninth 
of  January,  we  cannot  now  ascertain.  It  is  certain,  however,  that 
for  his  advances  made  about  that  time  he  received  a  draft  on 
Mazatlan  for  f  10,221.  This  draft  was,  as  we  have  seen,  ordered 
by  the  Supreme  Government  to  be  paid  on  the  twenty-fourth  of 
May,  1843. 

On  Limantour's  return  to  California  in  July,  1844,  the  cargo  of 
the  "  Joven  Fanita  "  was  seized  for  want  of  proper  documents.  This 
cargo  was  not  restored  to  him,  but  was  taken  by  Micheltorena  on 
the  eighteenth  of  August,  1844,  to  supply  his  necessities.  For 
these  goods  he  received,  on  the  sixteenth  of  May,  1845,  from  the 
General  Treasury  of  Mexico,  a  draft  on  the  Custom  House  at  Maz- 
atlan for  the  sum  of  156,184. 12^,  as  appears  by  the  official  com- 
munication on  the  subject,  signed  by  A.  Batres  and  Antonio  Maria 
Esnaurrizar,  and  addressed  to  Abrego. 

On  the  receipt  of  this  communication,  an  investigation  was  insti- 
tuted by  Abrego  to  ascertain  what  amount  of  goods  from  the  "  Joven 
Fanita  "  had  in  fact  been  received  by  Micheltorena.  For  this  pur- 
pose the  declaration  of  Larkin  was  taken,  with  whom  the  goods  had 
been  deposited,  and  by  whom  they  had  been  distributed  on  the 
orders  of  Micheltorena.  By  Larkin's  delaration,  it  appeared  that 
the  total  value  of  the  goods  of  Limantour  received  by  him  was 
$36,104.06^,  according  to  an  invoice  in  the  handwriting  of  the  for- 
mer ;  but  according  to  another  invoice  delivered  to  Micheltorena, 
their  value  was  29,632.4  reals. 

The  investigation  seems  at  this  point  to  have  been  dropped. 

It  thus  appears  that  for  his  advances  in  money  Limantour  was, 
in  1843,  paid  the  sum  of  $10,221,  and  for  the  cargo  of  the  "  Joven 


432  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

Fanita  "  he  was,  in  1845,  paid  the  sum  of  $56,184,121,  being,  it 
would  seem,  an  over-payment  of  about  $20,000  above  their  value, 
as  shown  by  his  own  invoice.  Whether  this  over-payment  was  the 
result  of  a  fraud  upon  the  Mexican  Government,  contrived  by  him- 
self and  Micheltorena,  it  is  unnecessary  to  inquire. 

These  two  distinct  transactions  of  Limantour  with  Governor  Mich- 
eltorena, which  are  so  clearly  explained  by  the  archives,  seem  to 
have  been  either  by  accident  or  design  confused  and  blended  to- 
gether by  his  witnesses.  The  fact  of  their  occurrence  has  no  doubt 
suggested  the  plausible  idea  of  founding  the  pretended  concessions 
of  land  upon  the  consideration  of  supplies  and  advances  furnished 
to  the  Governor. 

We  will  now  direct  our  attention  to  the  confirmations  of  those 
concessions  said  to  have  been  obtained  from  the  Supreme  Govern- 
ment. The  evidence  of  these  confirmations  originally  submitted  to 
the  Board  consisted  of  the  marginal  memoranda  on  the  grants  them- 
selves, and  signed  Bocanegra,  and  the  certificate  signed  by  Mich- 
eltorena and  Jimeno,  in  which  the  dispatch  of  Bocanegra  of  the 
seventh  of  October,  1843,  is  recited. 

There  has  since  been  produced  by  Castafiares  a  certified  copy  of 
the  order  in  pursuance  of  which  the  dispatch  is  alleged  to  have 
been  written,  with  the  advertencia  or  note  appended  to  it  already 
referred  to. 

With  reference  to  the  marginal  memoranda  or  certificates,  it  is 
to  be  observed  that  they  do  not  on  their  face  purport  to  be  the 
ofiicial  act  of  any  Mexican  functionary.  They  do  not  profess  to 
come  from  any  Minister  or  Department  of  that  Government.  They 
are  authenticated  by  no  seal ;  nor  are  they  signed  by  Bocanagra  as 
Minister  of  any  Department  of  the  Mexican  Administration. 

The  fact  of  the  approval  of  the  grants  is  stated  in  the  certificates, 
and  to  those  certificates  the  signature  of  Bocanegra  is  appended. 
It  is  only  from  other  testimony,  which  shows  that  at  the  date  of  the 
certificates  Bocanegra  held  a  certain  office  in  the  Mexican  Govern- 
ment, that  we  are  asked  to  presume  these  certificates  to  have  been 
signed  by  him  officially,  and  in  the  exercise  of  the  duties  pertaining 
to  his  office. 

Whether  or  not  it  properly  belonged  to  the  Department  of  which 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  433 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

he  was  Minister  to  furnish  such  evidence  as  this  of  the  action  of  the 
Supreme  Government,  and  whether  the  mode  in  which  they  are 
signed  in  any  respect  corresponds  with  the  provisions  of  the  Mexi- 
can law,  which  provides  for  the  manner  in  which  the  Ministers  are 
to  perform  official  acts,  is  perhaps  doubtful ;  but  it  is  not  now  neces- 
sary to  inquire. 

For  the  more  important  question  is  :  Did  the  Mexican  Government 
in  fact  approve  these  grants  ?  whatever  may  be  the  informality  or 
insufficiency  of  the  mode  in  which  that  approval  has  been  manifested. 

With  regard  to  the  certificate  purporting  to  have  been  given  by 
Micheltorena  to  Limantour,  in  which  the  communication  of  Bocan- 
egra  is  recited,  it  might  be  sufficient  to  say  that  it  bears  the  spurious 
or  forged  seal  found  on  the  other  papers  exhibited  in  these  causes. 

It  may  be  observed,  in  addition,  that  it  purports  to  be  signed  by 
Jimeno  as  Secretary.  But  the  document  was  not  exhibited  to 
Jimeno  when  he  was  examined  as  a  witness,  and  we  have  already 
seen  that  Jimeno  at  the  time  his  deposition  was  taken  was  ignorant 
that  any  grants  whatever  had  been  made  to  Limantour  by  Michel- 
torena. 

The  pretended  communication  of  Bocanegra,  set  forth  in  the  cer- 
tificate, refers  to  an  official  note  of  Micheltorena  of  the  twenty- 
fourth  of  February,  inclosing  the  memorial  of  Limantour,  in  which 
the  latter  asked  of  the  Supreme  Government  permission  to  acquire 
property,  etc.  If  Micheltorena  had  in  fact  written  such  a  note, 
and  if  Bocanegra  had  answered  it  as  set  forth  in  the  certificate, 
those  communications  would  have  been  found  in  the  archives. 

An  exhibit  has  been  filed  in  these  causes,  in  which  all  the  cir- 
culars, decrees  and  dispatches  of  the  Supreme  Government  with 
the  Department  of  Californias,  from  January,  1842,  to  December, 
1844,  are  digested.  The  dates  of  the  various  papers  are  given, 
and  a  short  statement  of  the  contents.  The  very  great  number  of 
these  dispatches — the  continuous  and  apparently  unbroken  order  of 
their  dates — afford  the  strongest  presumption  that  all  the  official 
communications  received  by  this  Department  are  preserved. 

It  is  almost  needless  to  say  that  no  communication  from  Bocane- 
gra, such  as  that  mentioned  in  Micheltorena's  certificate,  can  be 
found  amongst  the  numerous  official  dispatches  of  that  officer. 


434  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

The  communication  set  forth  in  the  certificate  is  dated,  as  we 
have  seen,  on  the  seventh  of  October,  1843. 

Among  the  dispatches  found  in  the  archives  is  one  from  the 
Treasury  General  of  the  Mexican  RepubUc,  dated  on  that  day,  and 
two  from  the  Ministry  of  Exterior  Relations  and  Government,  the 
Department  over  which  Bocanegra  presided,  and  dated  respectively 
on  the  ninth  and  eleventh  of  October. 

It  is  to  be  presumed  that  the  communication  from  the  Treasury 
General  of  Mexico  was  carried  by  the  same  mail  or  courier  as  that 
which  brought  the  communication  from  Bocanegra  of  the  same  date, 
had  the  letter  then  been  written.  It  appears,  however,  that  the 
dispatches  from  the  Minister  of  Exterior  Relations,  of  the  ninth 
and  eleventh  of  October,  were  not  received  until  the  beginning  of 
1844. 

But  the  certificate  of  Micheltorena  is  dated  December  25th,  1843, 
and  states  that  the  communication  recited  had  been  received  by  the 
last  mail. 

If  there  were  no  other  circumstances  in  the  case  to  prove  the 
spuriousness  of  this  document,  I  cannot  but  consider  the  negative 
testimony  of  the  archives  as  almost  sufficient  of  itself  to  lead  us  to 
that  conclusion. 

The  document  produced  by  Castanares,  and  alleged  to  have  been 
copied  from  the  archives  of  Mexico,  remains  to  considered. 

The  convincing  and  unanswerable  proofs  of  the  falsehood  of  this 
witness'  testimony,  which  have  already  been  adduced,  might  well 
justify  us  in  dismissing  without  further  comment  any  document  pro- 
duced by  him,  and  authenticated  by  his  testimony. 

But  there  is  intrinsic  evidence  of  spuriousness  in  the  document 
itself. 

In  the  note  or  advertencia  appended  to  the  acuerdo  or  order  for 
the  dispatch  of  the  seventh  of  October,  it  is  stated  that  the  Su- 
preme Government  "  had  approved  the  grant  made  to  the  foreigner 
Limantour,  setting  down  upon  the  original  titles  themselves  said 
ratificatio7i  and  approval,  and  returning  them  to  the  party  inter- 
ested, in  the  months  of  April,  June  and  December  of  1843,  aiid 
June,  1844."  See  the  decisions  (Acuerdos)  set  down  in  the  titles 
themselves,  which  were  returned  to  him  as  decreed. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  435 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

It  is  evident  that  the  person  who  prepared  this  document,  in  his 
zeal  to  furnish  evidence  of  the  ratification  and  confirmation  of  every 
grant  wliich  Limantour  might  pretend  to  have,  has  lost  sight  of  the 
fact  that  the  confirmations  referred  to  as  "  set  down  on  the  titles 
themselves,"  could  not  by  possibility  have  been  given. 

Of  all  the  titles  presented  by  Limantour  to  the  Board,  only  one 
is  dated  prior  to  December,  1843,  viz :  the  four  league  or  Yerba 
Buena  grant ;  and  only  two,  viz :  those  presented  in  these  cases, 
purport  to  have  been  confirmed  by  the  Supreme  Government. 

The  confirmation  of  the  Yerba  Buena  grant  purports  to  have 
been  "  set  down  on  the  title,"  in  April,  1843.  But  the  confirma- 
tions stated  to  have  been  set  down  in  June  and  December  of  that 
year,  not  only  do  not  appear,  but  there  were  not  at  those  dates,  on 
the  claimant's  own  showing,  any  grants  in  existence  on  which  such 
confirmations  could  have  been  inscribed. 

With  regard  to  the  confirmation  stated  to  have  been  set  down  in 
June  of  1844,  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that  none  such  appears ;  the 
pretended  confirmation  of  the  Islands  grant  being  dated  on  the  first 
of  March  of  that  year. 

It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  the  archives  of  the  former 
Government,  now  in  the  office  of  the  U.  S.  Surveyor  General,  have 
been  subjected  to  a  thorough  and  minute  examination. 

The  voluminous  documents  which  had  remained  in  that  office 
confused,  in  great  part  unknown,  and  practically  inaccessible,  have 
recently  been  collected,  classified  and  arranged  by  Mr.  Hopkins, 
the  keeper  of  the  archives,  to  whose  intelligent  and  conscientious 
industry  we  are  largely  indebted  for  the  information  we  have  ob- 
tained respecting  the  administration  of  Gov.  Micheltorena. 

The  results  of  that  examination  are  stated  by  Mr.  Hopkins  as 
follows : 

"I  have  made  a  special  search  to  discover,  among  the  archives, 
handwriting  similar  to  that  in  which  the  grants  in  these  cases  are 
written. 

"  I  never  found  any  grant  or  other  paper  in  the  archives  in  that 
handwriting. 

"  I  have  made  a  special  search  to  discover  any  entry,  memoran- 
dum or  allusion  to  these  grants  among  the  archives. 


436  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

"  I  find  no  mention  or  allusion  to  them,  except  in  the  expediente 
in  the  Islands  case  on  file  in  the  archives. 

"  In  the  Yerba  Buena  case  there  is  an  expediente  found  in  Mon- 
terey by  Vicente  Gomez,  which  was  not  in  the  original  archives. 

"  I  have  searched  in  the  Journals  of  the  Assembly  for  some  al- 
lusion to  these  grants,  but  find  none. 

"  I  have  also  searched  for  the  same  purpose  in  the  correspondence 
and  miscellaneous  documents  of  the  former  Government,  but  find 
nothing. 

"  I  find  nothing  whatever  in  the  archives  relating  to  these  grants 
except  the  document  that  I  have  mentioned. 

"  I  find  nowhere  any  reference  for  an  '  informe '  of  the  Yerba 
Buena  grant  to  any  judicial  officer. 

"  I  find  no  report  or  any  allusion  to  any  report  made  in  that  case 
to  the  Governor. 

"  I  have  made  a  similar  search  for  reports,  references  or  '  in- 
formes''  in  the  Islands  case. 

"  I  find  nothing  except  what  is  shown  by  the  expediente. 

"  I  have  searched  for  the  original  confirmation  of  these  grants, 
but  I  have  found  none,  nor  any  mention  of  or  allusion  to  it. 

"  I  found  no  original  communication  from  any  department  of  the 
Supreme  Government  of  Mexico  referring  or  alluding  to  these 
grants. 

"Among  the  original  documents  transferred  to  the  Surveyor  Gen- 
eral's office,  on  the  dissolution  of  the  Board  of  Land  Commissioners, 
are  several  petitions  of  Limantour  for  other  lands  in  California. 

"  No  original  cases  in  those  grants  were  filed. 

"  I  find  no  original  grants  to  him  anywhere  in  the  archives,  ex- 
cept those  produced  in  those  two  cases. 

"  I  have  searched  especially  to  ascertain  the  earliest  dates  at 
which  sealed  paper  for  the  year  1843,  habihtated  by  Micheltorena 
and  Castanares,  was  used  at  Los  Angeles. 

"  It  was  first  used  on  the  sixth  of  June,  1843. 

"  I  have  also  searched  to  ascertain  whether  any  land  titles  were 
issued  by  Micheltorena  at  Los  Angeles  in  1843  on  paper  purport- 
ing to  be  sealed  paper  for  1843,  habilitated  by  Micheltorena  and 
Castanares. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  437 

United  States  v.  Liraantour. 

"  I  find  only  one — the  grant  to  Limantour  in  the  Yerba  Buena 
case,  now  before  the  Court." 

It  is,  of  course,  impossible  justly  to  appreciate  the  force  of  the 
negative  testimony  furnished  by  the  entire  absence  of  any  men- 
tion or  allusion  to  the  grants  in  the  archives,  unless  the  number,  the 
character  and  the  apparent  completeness  of  those  records,  as  they 
now  exist,  be  considered. 

A  shght  examination  of  the  documents  contained  in  the  printed 
volume  of  archive  exhibits  filed  in  these  cases  will  show  how  full, 
voluminous,  and  it  would  seem  complete,  are  the  records  of  every 
important  event  during  Micheltorena's  administration. 

It  would  be  tedious  now  to  describe  the  large  mass  of  orders, 
dispatches,  decrees,  circulars,  official  correspondence,  reports,  ac- 
counts, etc.,  which  are  printed  at  length,  or  a  digest  of  which  is 
given  in  the  volume  referred  to. 

Two  records,  more  particularly  relating  to  grants  of  land,  may 
be  noticed. 

Among  the  archives  is  a  list  headed  as  follows  :  "  Index  of  lands 
adjudicated,  and  persons  to  whom  they  have  been  conceded."  At 
the  foot  of  the  list  is  a  note  in  the  handwriting  of  Manuel  Jimeno, 
Secretary  of  Despatch,  and  signed  by  him.  In  this  list  or  Index, 
which  has  long  been  known  under  the  name  of  "  Jimeno's  Index," 
are  mentioned  the  numbers  of  the  expedientes,  the  names  of  the 
lands  conceded,  and  of  the  persons  to  whom  concessions  are  made. 

On  comparing  it  with  the  expedientes  found  in  the  archives,  it  is 
found  to  correspond  with  them  in  all  these  particulars,  with  some 
exceptions,  which  are  noted  on  the  index  itself. 

This  list  embraces  land  concessions  from  the  year  1830  up  to  the 
twenty-fourth  of  December,  1844.  No  one  of  the  alleged  conces- 
sions to  Limantour  appears  in  this  list. 

There  is  also  found  in  the  archives  a  book  in  which  notes  or 
"  razones  "  of  land  grants  during  the  years  1844  and  1845  are 
entered. 

No  one  of  the  grants  to  Limantour,  purporting  to  have  been 
made  in  those  years  and  which  were  presented  by  him  to  the  Board, 
are  noted  in  this  book,  although  to  four  of  them  is  attached  the 
usual  memorandum  of  the  Secretary,  that  "  a  register  of  the  grant 
has  been  made  in  the  proper  book." 


438  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

The  total  absence  in  the  archives  of  all  record,  allusion  to  or 
trace  of  grants  so  numerous,  extensive  and  extraordinary  as  the 
alleged  concessions  to  Limantour,  would,  of  itself,  be  sufficient  to 
suggest  vehement  suspicions  of  their  genuineness  ;  but  when  taken 
in  connection  with  the  other  proofs  in  these  cases,  it  places  their 
true  character  beyond  any  reasonable  doubt. 

An  examination,  however,  of  the  archives  at  Monterey  has  dis- 
closed some  facts  relating  to  these  grants  which  deserve  mention. 

By  the  testimony  of  Mr.  E.  L.  Williams,  the  very  intelligent 
Recorder  of  Monterey,  it  appears  that  there  are  in  his  office  about 
thirty  documents  purporting  to  be  dated  at  Los  Angeles.  On  all 
of  these  dated  1838  the  name  of  that  town  is  written  Ciudad  de 
Los  Angeles,  Angeles  abbreviated,  or  Los  Angeles.  On  none  is 
the  town  styled  as  in  the  Limantour  papers,  "  Pueblo  de  Los  An- 
geles." 

It  also  appears  that  of  all  the  papers  and  documents  found  at 
Monterey,  no  one  bears  the  water  marks  which  appear  on  the  Li- 
mantour papers. 

It  may  also  here  be  observed  that  the  grant  to  Chaves,  alleged 
to  have  been  assigned  to  Limantour  and  presented  as  we  have  seen 
by  the  latter  to  the  Board,  bears  the  same  water  mark  as  the  cer- 
tificate of  Micheltorena  already  noticed. 

It  also  appears  that  on  comparing  the  paper  habilitated  for  the 
year  1843,  found  at  Monterey,  with  that  on  which  the  Limantour 
and  Castanares  petitions  are  written,  important  differences  exist. 

1.  The  impression  of  the  type  on  the  topmost  lines  on  the  latter 
is  smaller  than  that  on  the  former. 

2.  On  the  Limantour  and  Castanares  petitions  the  impression  of 
the  type  is  not  shown  upon  the  last  page  of  the  paper. 

On  all  the  other  papers  this  impression  is  visible  on  all  the  pages 
of  each  sheet,  indicating  that  the  sheet  must  have  been  folded  when 
placed  under  the  press. 

These  coincidences,  though  affording  of  themselves  no  conclusive 
evidence  of  the  spuriousness  of  these  titles,  are  yet  significant  as 
corroborating  and  confirming  our  conclusions  drawn  from  other  tes- 
timony, and  as  showing  that  every  circumstance  connected  with 
them,  even  the  most  minute,  points  unmistakably  in  the  same 
direction. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  439 


United  States  v,  Limantour. 


Such  is  the  result  of  the  vigorous  and  thorough  examination 
which  has  been  made  of  the  archives  of  this  Department. 

It  is  shown  that  the  archives  at  the  city  of  Mexico  are  equally 
silent  as  to  the  alleged  concessions  or  confirmations  in  these  cases. 

It  appears  that  on  the  fourth  of  March,  1854,  Mr.  Cripps,  the 
American  Charge  d' Affairs  at  that  city,  addressed  an  official  note 
to  Bonilla,  the  Mexican  Minister  of  Exterior  Relations,  requesting 
to  be  informed  whether  any  record  or  evidence  of  titles  granted  to 
Jose  Y.  Limantour  existed  in  the  archives  of  Mexico. 

To  this  note,  Bonilla  replies  by  enclosing  to  Mr.  Cripps  com- 
munications received  by  himself  from  the  Heads  of  the  Depart- 
ments, to  whom  he  had  applied  for  the  information  required. 

In  the  communication  received  from  the  Minister  of  Fomento  it 
is  said : 

"  I  have  searched  with  the  greatest  care  the  documents  to  which 
the  note  of  the  Seiior  Charge  d'Affairs  ad  interim  of  the  United 
States  refers,  and  I  have  not  found  any  evidence  whatever  of  the 
grant  which  might  have  been  made  to  Mr.  J.  Yves  Limantour  by 
General  Micheltorena,  of  four  square  leagues  of  land  to  the  west  of 
the  bay  of  San  Francisco,  Upper  California.  Nor  is  there  any 
minute  or  evidence  whatever  of  the  approval  of  said  grant  by  the 
Supreme  Government,  which,  as  it  is  said,  has  been  authorized  by 
Seiior  Bocanegra.  Nor  are  there  any  titles  of  any  other  land 
which  might  have  been  granted  to  said  Limantour  in  Upper  Cali- 
fornia, and  it  is  remarkable  that  there  is  not  a  single  communication 
of  Seiior  Micheltorena  in  which  notice  is  given  of  grants  of  lands 
which  he  had  made,  whereby  knowledge  might  be  obtained  in  rela- 
tion to  those  of  the  said  Limantour." 

The  communication  from  the  Ministry  of  War  and  Marine,  and 
from  that  of  the  general  and  public  archives  of  the  nation,  are  to 
the  same  effect,  and  in  the  communication  of  the  Minister  of  For- 
eign Affairs  to  Mr.  Cripps,  of  the  sixth  of  December,  1855,  he 
informs  the  latter  that  the  three  offices  of  Fomento,  of  War,  and  of 
the  General  Archives,  are  the  only  ones  where  the  evidences  of 
the  alleged  grants  could  be  found  in  the  city  of  Mexico.  He  there- 
fore refers  Mr.  Cripps  to  the  archives  of  the  pubhc  offices  of  Cali- 
fornia. How  unproductive  the  search  in  these  latter  has  been  we 
have  already  seen. 


440  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  acuerdo  and  advertencia  produced 
by  Castanares  purport  to  be  among  the  archives  of  the  Ministry  of 
Fomento,  the  Department  from  which  the  full  and  exphcit  commu- 
nication just  cited  was  received  by  Bonilla,  and  that  they  bear  the 
certificate  of  the  Manuel  Orosco,  who,  in  1854,  as  Minister  of  the 
General  and  Pubhc  Archives,  officially  informed  Bonilla  that  no 
documents  relating  to  these  titles  could  be  found  among  the  archives 
of  his  office. 

The  evidence  which  has  thus  far  been  considered  has  estabhshed, 
it  is  conceived,  beyond  all  question,  that  the  titles  of  the  claimant 
could  not  have  been  made  at  the  time,  in  the  manner,  and  under  the 
circumstances  alleged  by  him. 

We  will  now  briefly  consider  the  direct  and  positive  testimony, 
which  disclose  the  time  and  place  at  which  and  the  persons  by 
whom  they  were  fabricated. 

The  witnesses  who  testify  on  this  point  are  Francois  Jacomet  and 
Auguste  Jouan,  of  whom  the  former  was  a  clerk  in  the  house  of 
Robin  &  Co.,  Mexico,  of  which  Limantour  was  a  partner,  and  the 
latter  was  an  agent  of  Limantour  in  California. 

Jacomet  testifies  that  in  the  fall  of  the  year  1852  he  saw  W.  A. 
Richardson,  who  was  then  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  in  frequent  con- 
sultation with  Limantour  ;  that  he  does  not  know  the  nature  of  their 
business,  but  that  on  one  occasion  he  saw  them  making  a  plan,  for 
which  they  borrowed  from  himself  a  box  of  instruments ;  that 
Micheltorena  frequently  came  to  the  house,  and  after  being  closeted 
with  Limantour,  came  out  with  an  order  of  Limantour  on  the  wit- 
ness for  money ;  that  he  saw  Micheltorena  writing  at  a  table,  on 
which  were  some  sheets  of  Mexican  paper  having  stamps  upon  them 
not  of  the  year  in  which  he  was  writing  ;  that  he  saw  Emile  Letan- 
neur  writing  on  this  paper  after  Micheltorena  had  written  upon  it ; 
that  he  also  paid  on  the  order  of  Limantour  four  hundred  dollars  to 
Mr.  Bocanegra,  and  that  he  knew  of  no  business  transactions  be- 
tween them  up  to  that  time. 

The  witness  adds,  that  a  quarrel  having  arisen  between  Liman- 
tour and  Robin,  his  partner,  the  former  exhibited  to  the  witness  a 
letter  of  Robin,  in  which  he  threatened  "  to  denounce  Limantour 
as  a  maker  of  false  instruments,  and  that  he  would  denounce  not 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  441 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

only  him,  but  his  accomplice,  Mr.  Bocanegra ;  that  Limantour  was 
exasperated  at  the  charge,  and  said  that  if  he  continued  to  abuse 
him  in  that  way,  he  would,  through  the  influence  of  Mr.  Bocanegra 
and  others,  have  them  put  into  prison." 

Auguste  Jouan  testifies  that  in  March,  1852,  at  the  city  of  Mex- 
ico, Limantour  exhibited  to  him  some  four  or  five  titles  for  land  in 
California  signed  by  Micheltorena,  one  of  which  was  in  the  name  of 
Limantour,  the  others  in  those  of  various  persons ;  that  Limantour 
proposed  to  him  to  go  to  California,  find  out  where  the  lands  were, 
(on  which  point  Limantour  could  give  him  no  indication)  and  make 
a  survey  of  them ;  that  he  accordingly  went  to  California,  where 
Limantour  also  arrived  towards  the  end  of  1852 ;  that  on  the  ar- 
rival of  Limantour,  they  had  frequent  conversations  in  regard  to 
his  titles ;  that  he  (the  witness)  expressed  surprise  at  seeing  titles 
of  land  shown  to  him  by  Limantour  which  he  had  never  seen  before, 
and  that  he  conversed  "  freely  with  him  without  dissimulation  "  as 
to  their  being  fraudulent ;  that  when  Limantour  gave  him  the  titles 
for  translation,  he  noticed  that  on  the  Islands  grant  the  ratification 
by  Bocanegra  was  dated  in  1843,  while  the  grant  itself  was  dated 
in  1844  ;  that  on  calling  Limantour's  attention  to  this  discrepancy, 
he  was  told  by  the  latter  to  erase  the  figure  "  3  "  in  the  date  of 
the  ratification  and  substitute  the  figure  "  4."  This  he  accordingly 
did,  in  the  presence  of  Victor  Prudon,  but  intentionally  in  so 
rough  a  manner  that  a  hole  was  left  in  the  paper,  and  that  he  had 
not  seen  the  paper  from  that  day  until  it  was  exhibited  to  him  at 
his  examination,  after  he  had  made  the  foregoing  statement  with 
regard  to  it. 

The  witness  also  states  that  Limantour  gave  him  for  translation 
fourteen  titles,  none  of  which  were  identical  with  any  of  those  he 
had  previously  seen  in  Mexico. 

The  witness  further  states  the  substance  of  various  conversations 
between  himself  and  E.  Letanneur,  in  which  the  latter  gave  an  ac- 
count of  the  place  and  time  at  which  these  titles  were  fabricated 
and  signed  by  Micheltorena  and  Bocanegra,  but  as  the  admissibility 
of  these  conversations  is  questionable,  it  is  unnecessary  to  dwell 
upon  them. 

The  witness  further  states  that  on  Limantour's  arrival,  he  saw  in 


442  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v,  Limantour. 

his  possession  a  bundle  of  papers  covered  with  black  glazed  cloth, 
with  the  official  seal  of  the  French  Legation  stamped  upon  it,  di- 
rected to  Mr.  Dillon,  Consul  of  France  in  San  Francisco ;  that 
Limantour  at  the  time  said  it  contained  papers ;  that  he  again  saw 
this  bundle  at  the  St.  Francis  Hotel,  when  Letanneur  opened  one 
of  Limantour's  trunks ;  that  Letanneur  then  told  him  it  contained 
about  eighty  blank  titles  and  petitions,  all  signed  by  Micheltorena, 
and  which  were  the  same  as  those  used  by  Limantour  for  his  Cali- 
fornia land  titles.  About  two  days  after  he  was  in  company  with 
Limantour  and  Letanneur  at  the  hotel,  when  Limantour  informed 
them  he  was  going  to  dine  with  M.  Dillon,  and  both  Letanneur  and 
Jouan  remarked  that  he  carried  under  his  overcoat  the  bundle  di- 
rected to  M.  Dillon  which  he  had  seen  on  board  the  steamer  and 
again  at  the  hotel. 

He  adds  that  Letanneur  assured  him  that  M.  Levasseur,  the 
French  Minister,  had  no  knowledge  that  the  official  seal  had  been 
used  in  this  manner,  and  that  Limantour  had  obtained  it  fraudu- 
lently, etc. 

He  also  states  that  in  his  (witness')  conversations  with  Liman- 
tour, the  latter  "  never  denied^  hut  on  the  contrary,  always  admit- 
ted "  that  his  titles  were  fraudulent ;  and  finally,  that  Letanneur 
gave  him,  before  he  embarked  for  Mexico,  four  of  the  blank  titles 
which,  as  he  said,  he  had  taken  from  the  bundle  before  described, 
being  induced  to  do  so  by  Limantour's  statement  that  each  one  was 
worth  in  California  -f  10,000.  That  Limantour  subsequently  offered 
him  l|)l,000  if  he  would  surrender  them,  which  he  refused.  I  have 
not  thought  it  necessary  to  detail  at  length  the  positive,  frequent 
and  circumstantial  statements  contained  in  this  deposition  relative 
to  the  admissions  by  Limantour  of  the  fraudulent  character  of  the 
titles. 

If  his  testimony  is  beHeved,  there  is  an  end  of  the  case. 

But  as  he,  by  his  own  showing,  was  an  agent  and  accompHce  of 
Limantour,  his  unsupported  declarations  are  entitled  to  but  little 
weight.  We  will  therefore  consider  how  far  they  are  corroborated 
by  other  proofs. 

We  have  seen  that  Jacomet  testifies  that  the  grants  are  in  the 
handwriting  of  Letanneur,  and  Jouan  states  that  Letanneur  admit- 
ted to  him  he  had  written  them. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  443 

United  States  v.  LiiUcantour. 

These  statements  are  strongly  corroborated  by  circumstances 
heretofore  adverted  to  : 

The  fact  that  nowhere  in  the  archives  can  be  found  any  writing 
similar  to  that  of  these  grants  ; 

That  the  writing  of  Captain  Maciel,  who  is  said  by  the  claimant's 
witnesses  to  have  written  them,  is  found  on  comparison  to  be  essen- 
tially different ; 

That  these  grants  are  both  in  the  same  handwriting,  although 
purporting  to  be  made,  the  one  at  Los  Angeles,  and  the  other,  after 
an  interval  of  ten  months,  at  Monterey  ;  and  though  Maciel,  ac- 
cording to  the  claimant's  own  witnesses,  was  only  occasionally  em- 
ployed in  the  Secretary's  office.  The  spelhng  of  the  words  funda- 
dero  and  estacado ;  and  finally,  the  fact  that  Letanneur  himself 
admitted  the  writing  to  be  his,  before  a  grand  jury,  though  he  sub- 
sequently denied  it  on  the  stand. 

All  these  circumstances  tend  strongly  to  corroborate  the  testi- 
mony we  are  considering. 

The  statement  of  Jouan  with  regard  to  Limantour's  arrival  with 
the  forged  titles  in  his  possession,  is  corroborated  by  the  fact  that 
not  only  all  the  petitions  of  Limantour  to  the  Board  of  Commis- 
sioners, but  all  the  petitions  in  the  cases,  the  titles  in  which  bear 
the  spurious  seal  found  on  the  Limantour  documents,  "were  filed  in 
the  months  of  February  and  March,  1853.  with  one  exception — the 
petition  of  Josefa  de  Haro — which  was  filed  on  the  sixteenth  of 
March,  1852.  But  the  title  fabricated  by  Gomez,  and  bearing  the 
Limantour  seal,  was  not  exhibited  until  1854,  having  been  then,  as 
was  alleged,  recently  discovered. 

Again :  the  Islands  grant  mentioned  by  Jouan  as  having  been 
altered  by  him,  exhibits  the  erasure  and  the  hole  in  the  paper  de- 
scribed by  the  witness. 

No  attempt  has  been  made  by  the  claimants  to  explain  or  account 
for  this  circumstance.  The  witness  had  given  his  testimony  with 
regard  to  it  before  the  gra^t  was  exhibited  to  him.  The  paper  had 
been  for  several  years  in  the  custody  of  the  Surveyor  General.  It 
was  not  attempted  to  be  shown  that  the  witness  had  seen  the  docu- 
ment before  givin'g  his  testimony. 

But  the  strongest  and  most  conclusive  corroboration  of  the  testi- 
29 


444  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


United  States  v.  Limantour. 


monj  of  this  witness  is  the  fact  that  he  produces  one  of  the  blank 
titles  which,  as  he  says,  were  taken  by  Letanneur  from  the  bundle 
of  documents  in  Limantour's  possession. 

This  title  consists  of  a  paper  habihtated  by  the  rubrics  of  Mich- 
eltorena  and  Pablo  de  la  Guerra.  On  the  margin  is  an  order  of 
concession  signed  by  Micheltorena,  the  space  where  the  petition  is 
usually  written  being  left  blank.  Attached  to  it  is  another  paper 
habilitated  in  the  same  manner,  the  first,  second  and  third  pages  of 
which  are  blank,  except  that  on  the  latter  is  the  signature  of  Mich- 
eltorena. The  genuineness  of  Micheltorena's  signatures  and  rubrics 
to  these  documents  is  established.  The  rubric  of  Pablo  de  la  Guerra 
he  pronounces  a  forgery. 

I  have  been  unable  to  conjecture  any  mode  by  which  the  exist- 
ence of  such  documents  can  be  reconciled  with  the  possible  integrity 
of  the  Governor. 

If  they  were  obtained  by  Letanneur,  as  stated  by  Jouan,  from 
a  bundle  in  Limantour's  possession — and  Letanneur,  though  subse- 
quently examined  by  the  claimant,  does  not  deny  the  fact,  nor  was 
he  interrogated  with  respect  to  it — they  show  that  Limantour  had 
in  his  possession  the  means  and  instruments  for  effecting  the  fraud 
charged  upon  him.  And  even  if  we  regard  the  statement  that  they 
were  obtained  from  Limantour  as  doubtful,  they  nevertheless  re- 
main in  Court,  the  mute  but  undeniable  evidence  of  the  fact  that 
Gov.  Micheltorena  has  been  willing  to  lend  himself  to  the  fabrica- 
tion of  false  titles,  and  to  affix  his  name  to  documents  which  could 
only  have  been  intended  to  be  used  for  some  fraudulent  purpose. 

If  all  other  proofs  in  these  cases  were  wanting,  the  fact  that  doc- 
uments are  produced  bearing  the  genuine  signature  of  Micheltorena, 
and  the  forged  rubric  of  Pablo  de  la  Guerra,  coupled  with  the  fact 
that  no  trace  of  any  of  the  alleged  grants  to  Limantour  is  found  in 
the  archives,  would  be  sufficient  to  suggest  vehement  suspicions  as 
to  their  genuineness.  But  our  suspicions  become  certainties  when 
these  documents  are  shown  to  have  been  in  the  possession  of  the 
claimant  himself  about  the  time  at  which  he  first  presented  his 
numerous  claims  to  the  Board  for  confirmation ;  and  that  among 
the  papers  so  presented  is  found  one  (the  petition  in  the  Mendocino 
case)  bearing  the  genuine  signature  of  Micheltorena,  and  the  forged 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  445 


United  States  v.  Limantour. 


rubric  of  Pablo  de  la  Guerra,  precisely  resembling  the  blank  docu- 
ments produced  by  Jouan. 

When  we  find,  also,  on  the  petition  of  the  Islands,  that  the  mar- 
ginal concession  speaks  of  the  "  land  solicited,'*  while  the  "  islands  " 
constitute  the  chief  objects  of  the  petition ;  a  form  of  expression 
which  would  hardly  have  been  used  had  the  marginal  concession 
been  written  after,  and  with  a  knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  grantor 
of  the  contents  of  the  petition. 

We  have,  at  length,  reached  the  end  of  our  protracted  and  labo- 
rious examination  of  the  evidence  in  these  cases.  We  have  not 
thought  it  necessary  to  notice  in  detail  much  of  the  testimony  which 
has  been  taken. 

In  view  of  the  conclusive  evidence  by  which  it  is  shown  that 
these  titles  cannot  be  genuine,  we  have  considered  the  testimony  of 
the  witnesses  who  state  that  at  various  times  Limantour  spoke  of  or 
exhibited  these  grants,  as  deserving  of  but  little  weight. 

In  some  instances  these  witnesses  have,  no  doubt,  intended  to 
testify  truly.  But  the  date  or  the  import  of  the  conversations  may 
have  been  inaccurately  remembered,  or  Limantour  may  have  then 
been  contemplating  the  frauds  he  subsequently  consummated.  But 
no  declarations  of  Limantour  that  he  had  titles  for  lands  in  Cali- 
fornia, no  matter  when,  to  whom,  or  how  often  made,  can  overthrow 
or  even  affect  the  force  of  the  demonstration  which  has  shown  these 
titles  to  be  spurious,  and  especially  when  to  the  evidence  of  those 
declarations  is  opposed  testimony  of  his  admissions  of  their  fraudu- 
lent character,  and  the  undoubted  fact  that  from  the  conquest  of 
the  country  until  1852,  he  neglected  to  assert  or  even  give  notice 
of  his  claims  ;  and  that  on  -  one  of  them  he  suffered  a  city  to  be 
founded,  lots  to  be  sold  at  extravagant  prices,  and  buildings  to  be 
erected  at  great  expense  upon  the  land,  for  four  years,  during 
which  he  neither  in  person,  by  an  agent,  or  by  letter,  or  a  public 
notice,  apprised  the  inhabitants  of  his  rights. 

A  brief  recapitulation  of  the  more  important  facts  established  by 
the  proofs  will  conclude  our  labors. 

We  have  seen  that  the  claims  in  these  cases  are  but  two  out  of 
eight  presented  by  the  claimant  to  the  Board  for  confirmation. 

The  alleged  concessions  are  found  to  be  in  all  respects  extraor- 


446  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 


United  States  v.  Limantour. 


dinary  and  unprecedented,  whether  we  consider  the  enormous  ex- 
tent of  the  land  granted  and  its  situation  and  importance  to  the 
Government,  the  character  of  the  grantee,  or  the  consideration  on 
which  the  grants  are  alleged  to  have  been  made. 

To  make  any  grant  of  land  to  a  foreigner  was  a  departure  from 
an  ancient  and  settled  policy  of  the  Spanish  and  Mexican  Govern- 
ments; but  to  grant  him  the  most  important  port  on  the  "Pacific, 
with  every  military  position  about  it  or  commanding  an  entrance  to 
it,  was  an  act  which,  if  committed,  we  may  safely  affirm  was  without 
parallel  in  the  history  of  Mexico,  or  perhaps  in  that  of  any  civilized 
nation. 

The  grants  presented  in  the  cases  before  the  Court  are  in  their 
form  as  singular  as  in  their  object.  They  are  unattested  by  the 
Secretary,  although  every  other  grant  made  during  Micheltorena's 
administration  bears  the  signature  of  the  Secretary,  as  required 
both  by  custom  and  by  positive  law. 

They  are  in  the  same  handwriting,  though  made  at  different 
places  and  with  an  interval  of  ten  months  between  them,  although 
the  person  who  is  alleged  to  have  written  them  is  admitted  to  have 
been  employed  only  occasionally  in  the  office.  Among  all  the 
records  of  the  former  Government,  this  handwriting  nowhere  else 
appears  —  a  fact  which  increases  the  improbability  that  Maciel 
could  have  written  these  two  grants  only.  His  handwriting  is 
found  in  the  records,  but  it  in  no  respect  resembles  the  writing  in 
these  grants.  And  finally,  two  witnesses  swear  that  the  writing  is 
that  of  Emile  Letanneur,  a  clerk  of  the  claimant. 

The  grants  are  made  without  informes  from  any  judicial  officers. 
In  the  Islands  case,  none  appears  to  have  been  asked.  In  the  Yerba 
Buena  case,  it  is  recited  that  they  were  asked  and  obtained.  No 
such  reports  or  references  to  obtain  them  can  be  found  in  the  ar- 
chives. And  it  is  shown  by  the  testimony,  and  by  the  subsequent 
official  acts  of  the  officers  themselves,  that  none  could  have  been 
asked  for  or  given. 

The  only  reference  pretended  to  have  been  made,  was  by  Jimeno 
to  Richardson,  an  officer  whose  duties  had  no  connection  with  the 
granting  of  lands,  who  at  the  time  did  not  possess  the  confidence  of 
the  Government,  and  who  was  shortly  afterwards  removed  for  mis- 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  447 


United  States  v.  Limantour. 


conduct  in  office.  The  letter  purporting  to  be  written  by  Jimeno, 
the  Secretary,  is  not  presented  to  that  officer,  although  examined 
as  a  witness,  and  he  declares  his  ignorance  that  any  grant  whatever 
was  made  to  Limantour,  although  he  was  Secretary  of  the  Depart- 
ment, and  although  several  of  the  grants  presented  by  the  claimant 
to  the  Board  bear  his  attestation — a  statement  which  is  corroborated 
by  the  records  of  his  official  action  on  subsequent  petitions  for  a 
part  of  the  land  embraced  within  these  grants. 

The  expediente  in  the  Yerba  Buena  case  is  found  in  1852,  in  an 
office  which  was  not  its  proper  place  of  custody,  by  a  person  whose 
own  confession  in  another  case  shows  him  to  have  been  engaged  in 
fabricating  titles,  and  whose  character  to  this  Court,  which  has  so 
often  been  called  on  to  pass  upon  his  credibility,  no  attempt  has 
been  made  to  vindicate.  This  expediente  is  shown  to  have  escaped 
the  notice  of  several  persons  whose  duty  or  whose  interest  it  was  to 
examine  thoroughly  the  records  of  the  office  where  it  is  said  to  have 
been  found,  and  a  material  part  of  the  testimony  of  the  only  witness 
(Serrano)  who  pretends  to  have  seen  it  in  the  office  before  its  dis- 
covery by  Gomex,  is  conclusively  shown  to  be  a  deliberate  falsehood. 

The  expediente  in  the  Islands  case  is  found  among  the  archives, 
but  by  whom,  and  when  placed  there,  we  know  not.  It  is  not  num- 
bered nor  noted  in  Jimeno's  index,  nor  referred  to  in  any  other 
document  whatever. 

The  expedientes  in  all  the  other  cases  which  the  claimant  pre- 
sented to  the  Board  for  confirmation,  and  which  were  rejected,  have 
disappeared,  nor  is  any  trace  of  such  grants,  or  even  of  any  appli- 
cation for  them,  to  be  found,  with  the  single  exception  of  the  petition 
for  eighty  leagues  in  Mendocino  county,  for  which  the  original  grant 
was  not  produced,  nor  was  any  proof  offered  to  establish  it. 

We  find  that  all  the  documents  presented  by  the  claimant  bear 
a  similar  seal ;  and  that  seal  differs  from  the  genuine  seal  elsewhere 
found  on  public  documents.  It  is  proved  by  the  records  themselves, 
by  the  testimony  of  an  unimpeachable  witness,  and  by  the  admission 
of  Castanares  himself,  who  as  Administrator  of  the  Custom  House 
was  its  legal  custodian,  that  there  was  but  one  seal  during  the  years 
in  which  these  grants  purport  to  have  been  made  ;  and  the  fact  that 
this  seal  appears  on  eight  other  documents  which  are  produced, 


448  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

corroborates,  when  those  documents  are  examined,  our  convictions 
of  its  spuriousness. 

With  respect  to  the  Yerba  Buena  grant,  it  is  shown  that  the 
habiUtated  paper  on  which  the  petition  and  grant  are  written  could 
not  have  been  in  existence  at  the  time  those  documents  are  dated. 
This  fact  is  established,  not  only  by  the  official  correspondence, 
which  shows  when  the  order  for  the  habilitation  was  first  given,  and 
when  it  was  executed  and  the  paper  transmitted  to  and  received  by 
the  Governor,  but  by  the  fact  that  no  habilitated  paper  was  used  at 
Los  Angeles  until  after  the  date  when  the  correspondence  shows  it 
to  have  been  transmitted,  and  that  long  subsequently  to  the  date  of 
the  documents  now  produced,  proceedings  on  an  application  for 
lands  were  suspended  to  await  the  arrival  of  sealed  paper  which 
had  not  yet  been  received. 

With  respect  to  the  Islands  grant,  it  is  shown  that  at  the  date  of 
that  grant,  and  also  of  the  grant  for  Laguna  de  Tache,  presented 
by  Limantour  to  the  Board,  but  abandoned  without  proof  of  any 
kind,  the  alleged  grantee  was  not  in  the  country,  nor  had  he  been 
for  several  months  previously,  nor  did  he  arrive  until  more  than  six 
months  afterwards.  The  evidence  by  which  this  fact  is  estabUshed 
is  the  testimony  of  the  claimant's  chief  witness,  Manuel  Castailares, 
^and  documents  presented  and  signed  by  Limantour  and  found 
among  the  archives. 

With  regard  to  the  alleged  consideration  on  which  the  grants  are 
founded,  it  is  shown  that  for  any  advances  made  prior  to  the  first 
grant,  Limantour  received  a  draft  on  Mazatlan,  which  may  justly 
be  presumed  to  have  been  in  full  of  all  demands  against  the  Gov- 
ernment up  to  that  time.  That  he  shortly  after  left  the  country, 
and  did  not  return  until  above  eighteen  months  afterwards,  and 
therefore  could  not  have  made  the  advances  or  furnished  the  goods 
on  which  the  two  subsequent  grants,  made  in  1843,  purport  to  be 
founded. 

That  no  letter  of  Micheltorena,  referring  to  such  further  ad- 
vances, and  stating  that  further  concessions  had  been  made,  could 
have  been  delivered  by  Limantour  to  Castailares  in  February,  1844, 
in  Mexico,  because  Limantour  had  not  been  in  California  to  make 
the  advances,  nor  was  he  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  February,  1844, 
to  deliver  the  letter. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  449 

United  States  v.  Liraantour, 

It  is  also  shown  that  for  his  goods,  which  were  taken  in  August, 
1844,  by  Micheltorena,  he  was  paid  $56,184  12i,  being  an  over- 
payment of  about  120,000. 

And,  finally,  that  the  statement  made  by  Abrego  as  to  the  con- 
tents of  his  books,  and  the  mode  of  keeping  the  accounts  of  the 
Government,  is  conclusively  disproved  by  the  production  of  the 
books  themselves. 

With  respect  to  the  alleged  confirmations,  it  appears  that  those 
inscribed  upon  the  titles  themselves  are  unattested  by  any  seal ; 
that  they  are  not  signed  by  Bocanegra,  as  Minister,  nor  do  they 
purport  to  be  the  official  act  of  any  Mexican  functionary. 

It  also  appears  that  the  certificate  of  Micheltorena,  in  which  the 
dispatch  of  Bocanegra  is  recited,  bears  the  spurious  seal  found  on 
the  other  documents  presented  by  Limantour. 

That,  although  it  purports  to  be  attested  by  Jimeno  as  Secretary, 
it  was  not  exhibited  to  him  when  examined  as  a  witness  by  the 
claimant,  and  he  denies  all  knowledge  of  any  grants  whatever  to 
Limantour. 

That  neither  the  alleged  letter  of  Micheltorena,  to  which  Bocan- 
egra's  dispatch  purports  to  be  a  reply,  nor  the  dispatch  of  Bocan- 
egra is  found  in  the  archives,  nor  any  mention  of  or  allusion  to  it, 
although  a  dispatch  from  the  Treasury  General  of  the  same  date, 
and  two  dispatches  from  Bocanegra's  own  Department,  dated  a  few 
days  subsequently,  are  found  in  the  archives  among  the  official 
letters  of  Micheltorena's  administration.  It  also  appears  that  these 
last  communications,  although  relating  to  a  most  important  subject, 
were  not  received  until  long  after  the  time  when,  according  to 
Micheltorena's  certificate,  the  dispatches  approving  of  the  conces- 
sions to  Limantour  had  reached  California  ;  and  the  Custom  House 
record  of  arrivals  during  the  months  of  November  and  December, 
1843,  renders  it  almost  certain  that  no  dispatch  dated  in  Mexico 
on  the  seventh  of  October,  1843,  could  have  reached  California  on 
the  twenty-third  of  December  of  the  same  year. 

With  regard  to  the  "  acuerdo  "  or  order  from  the  archives  of 
Mexico,  with  the  "  advertencia ''  or  note  attached  to  it,  produced 
by  Castanares,  it  is  evident  that  the  statements  made  in  the  latter 
are  untrue.     For  no  ratification  could  have  been  "  set  down  on  the 


450  U.  S.  DISTRICT  COURT, 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

original  titles  themselves  in  the  months  of  June  and  December, 
1843,"  for  the  reason  that  no  titles  were  in  existence  in  the  month 
of  June  but  the  Yerba  Buena  grant,  of  which  the  approval  is  dated 
April  the  18th ;  and  the  two  grants  dated  respectively  December 
4th  and  December  16th,  1843,  could  not  have  been  presented  to 
the  Supreme  Government  of  Mexico  in  the  same  month  as  that  in 
which  they  are  dated. 

Nor  do  these  grants,  nor  any  others  presented  by  Limantour, 
purport  to  bear  "  confirmations  set  down  upon  them  "  as  stated  in 
the  "  advertencia  " — for  the  grant  of  the  fourth  of  December,  1843, 
(Laguna  de  Tache)  has  no  approval  whatever  inscribed  upon  it ; 
and  that  of  the  sixteenth  of  December  (the  Islands  grant)  has  an 
approval  dated  March  1st,  1844. 

It  also  appears  from  the  communications  addressed  by  the  Min- 
ister of  Exterior  Relations  of  Mexico  to  Mr.  Cripps,  the  United 
States  Charge  d'Affaires,  that  search  has  been  made  in  the  only 
three  public  offices  of  that  Republic  in  which  evidence  relating  to 
the  titles  of  Limantour  would  be  found  if  it  existed,  and  that  those 
archives  are  as  barren  of  all  record  or  trace  of  those  letters  or  con- 
firmations as  are  those  of  Calitornia. 

And,  finally,  we  have  the  positive  testimony  of  two  witnesses,  the 
one  a  clerk  and  the  other  an  agent  of  Limantour,  who  identify  the 
handwriting  of  the  grants  ;  and  one  of  whom  describes  the  private 
interviews  of  Bocanegra,  Micheltorena  and  Limantour,  and  states 
the  amount  of  money  paid  to  the  former  on  the  order  of  the  latter ; 
while  the  other,  in  addition  to  his  evidence  of  the  frequent  admis- 
sions by  Limantour  of  the  fraudulent  character  of  these  titles,  pro- 
duces in  Court  a  blank  petition  and  grant  bearing  the  genuine 
signatures  of  Micheltorena  and  the  forged  rubric  of  Pablo  de  la 
Guerra,  demonstrating  that  Limantour  had  in  his  possession  papers 
which  not  only  afforded  the  means  of  committing  the  frauds  charged 
upon  him,  but  which  could  not  have  been  prepared  for  any  honest 
purpose. 

If  to  all  this  be  added  the  fact  that  the  testimony  of  Prudon, 
Serrano,  Cambuston,  Abrego  and  Castailares,  the  chief  witnesses 
of  the  claimant,  has  been  shown  in  almost  every  important  particular 
to  be  false,  we  are  justified  in  asserting  that  the  proofs  in  these 
cases  have  the  force  and  certainty  of  a  demonstration. 


JUNE  TERM,  1858.  451 

United  States  v.  Limantour. 

On  reviewing  the  whole  case,  it  is  not  easy  to  confine  within  the 
limits  of  judicial  moderation  the  expression  of  our  indignation  at  the 
fraud  which  has  been  attempted  to  be  perpetrated. 

Whether  we  consider  the  enormous  extent  or  the  extraordinary 
character  of  the  alleged  concessions  to  Limantour ;  the  official  po- 
sitions and  the  distinguished  antecedents  of  the  principal  witnesses 
who  have  testified  in  support  of  them,  or  the  conclusive  and  unan- 
swerable proofs  by  which  their  falsehood  has  been  exposed  ;  whether 
we  consider  the  unscrupulous  and  pertinacious  obstinacy  with  which 
the  claims  now  before  the  Court  have  been  persisted  in — although 
six  others  presented  to  the  Board  have  long  since  been  abandoned — 
or  the  large  sums  extorted  from  property  owners  in  this  city  as  the 
price  of  the  relinquishment  of  these  fraudulent  pretensions;  or, 
finally,  the  conclusive  and  irresistible  proofs  by  which  the  perjuries 
by  which  they  have  been  attempted  to  be  maintained  have  been 
exposed,  and  their  true  character  demonstrated — it  may  safely  be 
affirmed  that  these  cases  are  without  parallel  in  the  judicial  history 
of  the  country.  *• ' 

It  would  have  been  more  agreeable  to  the  Court,  and  would  have 
lessened  its  labors,  had  any  argument  been  addressed  to  it  in  behalf 
of  the  claimant.  But  the  counsel  who  had  principally  conducted 
the  case  for  Limantour,  shortly  before  the  hearing  announced  that 
they  had  retired  from  the  case.  No  reason  for  this  step  was 
assigned  ;  but  the  Court  was  not  at  liberty  to  treat  it  as  an  aband- 
onment of  the  cause  from  any  conviction  on  the  part  of  those  gen- 
tlemen of  its  fraudulent  character. 

The  remaining  counsel,  though  he  attended  at  the  hearing,  and 
was  invited  by  the  Court  to  submit  a  brief  on  behalf  of  the  claimant, 
declined  to  do  so. 

The  Court  has  therefore  felt  it  to  be  its  duty  to  give  to  the  evi- 
dence a  more  elaborate  examination,  and  to  set  forth  the  grounds  of 
its  decision  at  greater  length  than  would  otherwise  have  been 
necessary. 

It  is  no  slight  satisfaction  to  feel  that  the  evidence  has  been  such 
as  to  leave  nothing  to  inference,  suspicion  or  conjecture,  but  that 
the  proofs  of  fraud  are  as  conclusive  and  irresistible  as  the  attempted 
fraud  itself  has  been  flagrant  and  audacious. 


GOVERNORS  OF  CALIFORNIA, 


Gaspar  de  Portala,  from  1767  to  1771. 

It  was  under  Portalaf'that  the  Eeverend  Father  Junipero  Serra  founded  the  first 
Missions  of  Upper  California. 

Father  Jose  Miguel  Serra  was  born  on  the  twenty-fburth  of  November,  1713,  on 
the  Island  of  Majorca.  At  sixteen  he  entered  the  convent  of  Jesus,  in  Palma,  the 
capital  of  the  island.  On  the  fifteenth  of  September,  1731,  he  was  admitted  to 
holv  orders  under  the  name  of  Father  Junipero.  On  the  thirteenth  of  April, 
1 749,  he  sailed  from  the  island  with  his  bosom  friend  and  biographer,  Father  Fran- 
cisco Palou,  for  Mexico.  They  left  Cadiz  on  the  twenty-eighth  of  August,  reached 
Vera  Cruz  on  the  sixth  of  December,  and  travelling  on  foot.  Father  Junipero 
arrived  at  Mexico  on  the  first  of  January,  1750.  From  thence  he  was  sent  on  the 
Sierra  Gorda,  among  the  Pima  Indians,  where  he  remained  nine  years ;  fi*om  thence 
he  travelled  over  Mexico,  preaching  the  gospel,  until  the  middle  of  1767. 

The  decree  of  Carlos  III,  expelling  the  Jesuits  from  his  dominions,  was  put  in 
force  on  the  twenty-fifth  of  June,  1767.  As  to  Lower  California,  the  Viceroy, 
Marquis  de  Croix,  placed  its  execution  in  the  hands  of  the  Catalonian  Captain  of 
Dragoons,  Gaspar  de  Portala,  appointing  him  at  the  same  time  Governor  of  the 
Peninsula,  and  placing  under  his  command  fifty  well  armed  men  to  expel  the 
Jesuits  from  the  Missions  by  force,  if  necessary. 

Portala  embarked  in  Matchantel  with  his  forces,  and  fourteen  Franciscan  monks  to 
succeed  the  Jesuits.  Being  prevented  by  a  storm  from  reaching  Loreto,  in  Lower 
California,  as  ordered  by  the  Viceroy,  he  landed  at  San  Bernabe  towards  the  latter 
part  of  1767.  From  San  Bernab6,  Portala  went  to  Loreto  with  twenty-five  soldiers 
and  the  Captain  of  the  Peninsula.  In  his  conversation  with  the  Captain,  he  dis- 
covered that  no  force  would  be  required  to  expel  the  sixteen  Jesuits.  When  he 
reached  Loreto,  he  sent  for  Father  Bonito  Ducrue,  missionary  of  Guadalupe  and 
Superior  of  the  Missions.  He  communicated  his  decree  to  Father  Ducrue  and  two 
other  Jesuits.  He  found  that  the  Captain  was  right,  as  the  Jesuits  respectfully  sub- 
mitted to  the  order,  and  left  California  on  the  third  of  February,  1768,  on  the  Con- 
cepcion,  bound  for  San  Bias. 

After  the  expulsion  of  the  Jesuits,  the  Viceroy,  with  the  concurrence  of  the 
Inspector  General  of  the  kingdom,  Don  Jos^  de  Galvez,  decided  to  place  the  Mis- 
sions of  Lower  California  under  the  care  of  the  college  of  San  Fernando,  in  Mex- 


454  GOVERNORS    OF    CALIFORNIA. 

ico.  For  that  purpose  they  required  twelve  priests  of  the  college,  and  Father 
Junipero  was  appointed  President  of  these  missionaries.  On  the  fourteenth  of 
July,  1767,  they  left  Mexico  for  San  Bias.  On  the  twenty-first  of  August  they 
reached  Tepic,  where  four  other  priests  were  taken.  Whilst  they  were  awaiting 
there  the  construction  of  the  vessels  which  were  to  carry  them,  the  Concepcion 
arrived  at  San  Bias  with  the  Jesuits,  and  they  sailed  on  that  vessel  on  the  twelfth 
of  March,  1768.  They  arrived  at  Loreto  on  the  first  of  April ;  the  next  day  each 
one  went  to  the  Mission  assigned  him,  Father  Junipero  taking  care  of  the  Mission 
of  Loreto. 

Galvez  having  been  invested  with  powers  to  visit  the  Missions  of  Lower  Cal- 
ifornia, and  having  a  royal  order  to  send  an  expedition  by  sea  to  settle  the  Port  of 
Monterey,  in  Upper  California,  or  at  least  that  of  San  Diego,  he  sailed  from  San 
Bias  on  the  twenty-fourth  of  May,  1768,  and  reached  the  Peninsula  on  the  sixth 
of  June. 

In  order  to  better  carry  out  the  intentions  of  liis  majesty,  Galvez  made  up  his 
mind  that,  besides  the  expedition  by  sea,  he  would  send  another  by  land.  He  com- 
municated this  idea  to  Father  Junipero,  who  agreed  with  him.  They  decided  that 
three  vessels  should  sail  to  meet  the  expedition  by  land  at  San  Diego  ;  that  three 
missionaries  should  leave  on  the  first  two,  and  another  on  the  vessel  to  start 
subsequently.  They  agreed  that  three  Missions  should  be  founded :  one  at  San 
Diego,  anotlier  at  Monterey,  and  a  third  at  San  Buenaventura,  midway  between 
the  two  first. 

On  the  ninth  of  January,  1769,  tlie  San  Carlos  left  La  Paz  with  the  members  of 
the  expedition,  among  whom  was  Pedro  Fajes,  who  became  Governor  of  Upper 
California,  in  1782,  and  had  under  his  command  twenty-five  Catalonian  volunteers. 
The  San  Antonio  left  San  J^ucas  on  the  eleventh,  and  the  Senor  San  Jose  left 
Loreto  on  tlie  sixteenth  of  June  of  the  same  year. 

Galvez  divided  the  expedition  by  land  in  two  parts.  Portala  was  appointed 
commander-in-chief  of  the  expedition,  and  Captain  Fernando  Rivera  y  Moncada, 
his  second  in  command,  was  to  take  charge  of  the  first  division. 

The  first  division  arrived  at-  San  Diego  on  the  fourteenth  of  May,  1769,  after 
fifty-two  days  travel  from  Loreto.  The  second  division,  under  tlie  cliarge  of  Por- 
tala, with  wliom  was  Father  Junipero,  arrived  on  tlie  first  of  July,  after  forty-six 
days  travel.  They  found  in  port  the  San  Antonio,  whicli  had  arrived  on  the  elev- 
enth of  April,  and  the  San  Carlos,  wliicli  readied  San  Diego  twenty  days  after. 
The  Seiior  San  Jose  not  having  been  heard  from,  it  was  presumed  tliat  it  was 
wrecked. 

On  account  of  the  loss  of  life  among  the  crews  of  the  vessels,  it  was  agreed  that 
the  expedition  by  sea  should  join  the  one  by  land,  and  the  San  Antonio  was  or- 
dered to  San  Bias  for  additional  crew  and  more  supplies  for  the  two  vessels.  The 
San  Carlos  remained  at  anchor  to  await  the  arrival  of  the  San  Antonio,  when  both 
were  to  sail  for  Monterey. 

On  the  sixteenth  of  July,  1769,  Fatlier  Junipero  founded  the  Mission  of  San 
Diego,  at  tlie  port  of  that  name,  wliich  in  1603  had  been  discovered  by  Admiral 
Sebastian  Vizcaino,  who  in  the  same  year  discovered  the  port  of  Monterey. 

Portala,  Fajes  Moncada,  and  seventy-three  others  left  San  Diego  by  land  on  the 
fourteenth  of  July,  1769,  to  seek  out  the  port  of  Monterey;  they,  however,  re- 
turned on  the  twenty-fourth  of  January,  1770,  after  having  gone  as  far  north  as 
San  Francisco  without  finding  tiie  above  named  port. 


GOVERNORS    OF   CALIFORNIA.  455 

Tlic  San  Antonio  left  San  Bias  direct  for  Monterey.  Fortunately,  the  loss  of  her 
anchor  in  tlic  neighborhood  of  Santa  Barbara  compelled  her  to  put  back  for  San 
Diego  to  get  an  anchor  from  the  San  Carlos.  This  vessel  being  loaded  with  sup- 
plies and  having  an  additional  crew,  it  was  resolved  that  a  new  expedition,  by 
land  and  sea,  should  start  for  Monterey.  Father  Junipero  sailed  on  the  San  An- 
tonio on  the  sixteenth  of  April,  1770,  and  Portah'i  started  by  land  the  next  day. 

The  San  Antonio  reached  Monterey  on  the  thirty-first  of  May,  1770.  The  ex- 
pedition by  land  had  already  arrived  there  on  the  twenty-fourth. 

On  the  third  of  June,  the  ceremony  of  taking  possession  of  the  port  was  per- 
formed, and  on  that  day  the  Mission  of  San  Carlos  was  founded. 

The  dates  of  tlie  foundation  of  the  other  Missions  are  to  be  found  at  No.  609  in 
the  annexed  table  of  land  claims  presented  to  the  Land  Commission. 

Whilst  gathering  the  foregoing  facts  from  the  life  of  Father  Junipero  by  Father 
Francisco  Falou,  where  they  are  related  with  such  pious  simplicity,  we  involun- 
tarily feel  a  desire  to  pay  a  just  tribute  to  those  holy  men  whose  sole  object  was  to 
Christianize  the  Indians  of  the  Californias.  It  was  neither  gold  nor  honors  which 
drew  them  to  encounter  the  dangers  and  hardships  we  find  described  in  those  inter- 
esting pages,  and  which  breathe  the  true  fervor  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord ;  but 
they  were  true  apostles,  devoting  their  evangelical  lives  in  teaching  the  simple 
doctrines  of  their  faith,  and  the  trades  and  occupations  of  civilized  communities. 

Father  Palou  tells  us  that  on  the  fifteenth  of  August,  1769,  at  San  Diego,  one 
month  after  the  founding  of  the  Mission,  Father  Junipero  and  his  party  were  at- 
tacked by  a  large  number  of  Indians,  and  they  were  driven  away  only  after  the 
loss  of  a  boy.  A  few  days  after  the  attack,  the  Indians  appearing  to  be  more 
friendly,  Father  Junipero  attempted  to  baptize  a  child  for  the  first  time.  Whilst 
completing  the  ceremony  by  pouring  water  on  the  child  out  of  a  shell,  the  Indians 
snatched  away  the  child,  leaving  the  confused  Father  with  the  shell  in  his  hands. 
It  required  all  his  prudence  to  prevent  the  soldiers  from  avenging  the  insult.  The 
grief  experienced  by  the  Father  was  so  great  that  he  could  not  get  over  it  for  sev- 
eral days,  and  he  attributed  his  ill  success  to  his  own  sins.  Many  years  after, 
whilst  stating  this  circumstance,  his  eyes  would  be  filled  with  tears,  but  as  he  could 
then  count  1046  christianized  Indians  in  that  Mission,  he  would  exclaim:  "But 
let  us  thank  God,  that  without  the  least  opposition,  we  have  accomplished  so 
much." 

On  tlie  fourtli  of  November,  1775,  the  Indians  again  attacked  that  Mission,  re- 
duced it  to  ashes,  cruelly  massacred  Father  Luis  Jaime,  and  killed  several  other 
persons. 

In  August,  1781,  the  Yunias  set  fire  to  the  two  Missions  on  the  Colorado  river, 
killed  four  priests,  eight  soldiers  and  Ca])tain  Fernando  Rivera  y  Moucada. 

These  were  some  of  the  dangers  encountered  by  these  devout  men ;  but  nothing 
can  better  show  the  meekness  and  humility  of  Father  Junipero  than  the  following 
anecdote  told  us  by  Father  Palou.  After  landing,  in  December,  1749,  in  Vera 
Cruz,  he  traveled  on  foot  to  Mexico ;  the  journey  caused  his  feet  to  swell  consid- 
erably. One  night,  in  his  sleep,  he  scratched  one  of  them  to  such  an  extent,  that 
when  he  awoke  he  had  made  such  a  severe  wound  that  he  never  got  over  it  through 
life.  Immediately  preceding  Galvez's  arrival,  and  to  meet  him,  he  had  walked  nine 
hundred  miles,  and  as  in  all  his  travels  he  never  wore  either  socks,  boots  or  shoes 
but  simply  sandals  ;  one  evening  when  he  arrived  at  San  Juan  de  Dios,  in  Lower 
California,  on  his  way  to  San  Diego,  his  wound  became  such  that  he  could  not  go 


456  GOVERNORS   OF  CALIFORNIA. 

any  further.  Portala,  seeing  his  condition,  ordered  his  men  to  prepare  a  litter  to 
carry  him.  Father  Junipero  was  so  deeply  affected  at  the  idea  of  giving  so  much 
trouble  to  the  men,  that  placing  his  faith  in  God,  he  called  to  him  Juan  Antonio 
Coronel,  the  arriero.  "  My  son,"  said  he,  "  could  you  not  prepare  something  to 
relieve  my  foot  and  leg  V  "  Why,  Father,"  answered  Coronel,  "what  can  I  know  1 
am  I  a  doctor "?  I  am  only  an  arriero,  and  all  that  I  have  cured  are  the  wounds  of 
beasts."  "  Well,  my  son,"  said  the  holy  man,  "only  consider  that  I  am  a  beast, 
and  that  this  wound  is  nothing  but  a  beast's  wound,  which  has  caused  the  swelling 
of  the  leg  and  those  pains  which  even  keep  me  from  sleeping,  and  prepare  me  the 
same  thing  you  would  apply  to  a  beast."  The  arriero  smiling,  with  all  the  assist- 
ants, said,  "  I  will  do  it.  Father,  to  please  you."  He  took  some  tallow  and  gath- 
ered a  few  herbs ;  he  crushed  and  mixed  them  well  with  two  stones,  and  after 
stewing  the  mixture  he  applied  it. 

With  the  help  of  God,  as  Father  Junipero  writes  to  Father  Palou  when  he  ar- 
rived at  San  Diego,  he  slept  all  that  night  till  morning.  He  was  so  relieved  that 
he  said  his  morning  prayers  as  customary,  and  celebrated  mass  as  if  nothing  had 
happened,  and  the  expedition  kept  on  without  losing  an  instant. 

In  July,  1784,  Father  Palou,  who  was  then  in  San  Francisco,  having  received  a 
letter  from  Father  Junipero  requesting  his  presence  in  Monterey,  he  reached  that 
place  on  the  eighteenth  of  August,  and  found  Father  Junipero  afflicted  with  the 
disease  which  was  to  terminate  his  Christian  career.  On  the  twenty-eighth,  a  little 
before  ten  in  the  evening.  Father  Junipero,  in  his  room,  was  still  able  to  walk  to 
the  boards  covered  with  a  blanket,  on  which  he  rested ;  and  after  reclining  on 
them  with  the  Holy  Cross  near  by,  so  softly  did  his  soul  depart  that  his  faithful 
companion  thought  it  was  nothing  but  a  quiet  slumber. 

Father  Junipero  was  in  his  seventy-first  year  when  he  died.  In  the  fifteen  years 
of  his  life  in  Upper  California,  five  Spanish  and  nine  christianized  Indian  settle- 
ments had  been  made,  and  5,800  Indians  had  been  baptized. 

The  folloAving  particulars  are  drawn  from  the  Spanish  archives  of  the  State  of 
California : 

On  the  twelfth  of  November,  1770,  the  Viceroy  Marquis  de  Croix  writes  to 
Pedro  Fajes,  commander  of  the  Presidio  at  Monterey,  directing  him  to  make  a 
settlement  at  the  port  of  San  Francisco. 

Felipe  Barri,  prom  1771  to  1774. 

The  first  mention  we  find  of  Barri  as  Governor  is  in  a  letter  he  addresses  in  that 
capacity  from  Loreto  to  Pedro  Fajes,  commander  of  the  Presidio  of  Monterey, 
dated  the  second  of  Juno,  1771. 

On  the  seventh  of  September,  1773,  Pedro  Fajes  was  succeeded  in  the  command 
of  the  Presidio  of  San  Diego  and  Monterey  by  Fernando  Rivera  y  Moncada, 
under  an  order  of  the  Viceroy  Bucarely. 

Felipe  de  Neve,  from  1774  to  1782. 

On  the  twenty-eighth  of  December,  1774,  Governor  Barri  is  succeeded  by  F.  de 
Neve. 

On  the  twentieth  of  July,  1776,  Governor  Neve  is  ordered  by  the  Viceroy  to  re- 
move from  Loreto  to  the  Presidio  of  Monterey ;  he  arrived  there  on  the  third  of 
February,  1777.  Moncada  is  then  transferred  as  Lieutenant  of  Neve  at  Loreto,  or 
at  whatever  place  the  Presidial  might  be  located. 


GOVERNORS   OP  CALIFORNIA.  '  457 

Pedro  Fajes,  i'rom  1782  to  1790. 
Fajes  became  Governor  on  the  seventh  of  September,  1782. 

Jose  Antonio  Rombu,  from  1790  to  1792. 
Romeu  was  appointed  Governor  by  the  Viceroy  Conde  de  Riverra  Gigado  on 
the  first  of  September,  1790 ;  he  was  put  in  possession  on  the  seventeenth  of  April, 
1791 ;  he  died  on  the  ninth  of  April,  1792. 

Jose  Joaquin  de  Arrillaga,  from  1792  to  1794. 
Arrillaga  became  Governor,  ad  interim,  on  the  ninth  of  April,  1792,  on  the  death 
of  Romeu. 

Diego  de  Borica,  from  1794  to  1800. 
Appointed  by  the  Viceroy,  May  14th,  1794;  he  sails  for  Mexico  in  January, 
1800,  and  leaves  Arrillaga  as  his  successor,  ad  interim;  Borica  died  in  1801. 

Jose  Joaquin  de  Arrillaga,  from  1800  to  1814. 
Remains  Governor  until  1814.    From  an  inventory  of  his  library  in  the  archives, 
it  would  appear  that  he  was  a  student  and  a  man  of  learning. 

Jose  Arguello,  Governor  ad  interim,  from  1814  to  1815. 
Pablo  Vicente  de  Sola,  from  1815  to  1823. 

News  having  reached  Governor  Sola  that  a  sovereign  Gubernado  Junta  had  been 
installed  at  Mexico,  it  was  communicated  to  an  assembly  of  ten  delegates  of  Cal- 
ifornia, held  on  the  ninth  of  April,  1822,  which  declared,  that  from  that  date  the 
province  of  California  was  dependent  alone  on  the  Government  of  Mexico  and 
independent  of  the  dominion  of  Spain,  as  well  as  of  any  other  foreign  power. 
Governor  Sola  signed  the  declaration. 

On  the  twentieth  of  May,  1822,  Colonel  P.  V.  Sola  was  appointed  Deputy  to 
the  Congress  of  the  empire.  He,  however,  appears  to  be  acting  as  Governor  up  to 
the  ninth  of  November,  1822. 


GOVERNORS  UNDER  MEXICO. 

Luis  Arguello,  from  1823  to  1826. 
Acted  as  Governor,  ad  interim,  from  January,  1823. 

Jose  Maria  de  Echeandia,  from  1826  to  1831. 

Arrived  at  Loreto,  June  25th,  1825,  and  gives  notice  to  Arguello  that  he  had 
been  appointed  Governor. 

On  December  30th,  1829,  Echeandia  orders  all  Spaniards  who  will  not  adhere 
to  the  new  system  to  remove  their  property. 

Manuel  Victoria,  prom  1831  to  1832. 

On  the  thirty-first  of  January,  1831,  takes  charge  of  the  Government. 

On  the  ninth  of  December,  1831,  Echeandia  writes  to  General  Vallejo  that  Gov- 
ernor Victoria  is  disarmed,  his  forces  are  scattered,  and  he  is  in  a  dying  condition. 

On  the  fifteenth  of  January,  1832,  Echeandia  writes  to  the  President  of  the 
Departmental  Assembly  that  Victoria  had  left  California  for  Mexico  on  the  Amer- 
ican ship  Pocahontas. 


458  GOVERNORS    OP   CALIFORNIA. 

Pio  Pico,  from  1832  to  1833. 

On  the  eleventh  of  January,  1832,  Pio  Pico  being  first  vocal  of  the  Depart- 
mental Assembly,  becomes  Governor,  ad  interim. 

The  Ayuntamiento  of  Monterey,  in  the  meantime,  refuses  to  recognize  Pio  Pico 
as  Governor,  preferring  that  Echeandia  should  act  as  such  until  news  be  received 
from  the  Supreme  Government. 

It  would  seem  that  there  were  two  Governors,  Pio  Pico  acting  as  first  vocal  of 
the  Assembly,  and  Echeandia  appointed  by  the  Ayuntamiento  of  Monterey. 

Jose  Figueroa,  from  1833  to  1835. 
Appointed  by  the  President  in  April,  1832.     Landed  at  Montery  on  the  fifteenth 
of  January,  1833;  on  the  twenty-fifth  of  the  same  month,  Echeandia  submits  to 
Figueroa;  Figueroa  asks  to  be  relieved  on  the  twenty-fifth  of  March,  1833;  he 
died  at  Monterey  in  1835. 

Jose  Castro,  from  1835  to  1836. 
Being  first  vocal  of  the  Departmental  Assembly,  lie  was  appointed  Governor  by 
Figueroa,  then  acting  as  Governor,  on  tlie  twenty-ninth  of  August,  1835,  and  he 
afterwards  became  Governor,  ad  interim,  on  the  death  of  Figueroa. 

Nicolas  Gutierrez,  in  1836. 
Acted  as  Governor,  ad  interim,  from  the  second  of  January,  1836. 

Mariano  Chico,  in  1836. 
Took  charge  of  the  Government  on  the  third  of  May,  1836.     Appointed  by  the 
President  on  the  thirtieth  of  July  of  the  same  year.     He  leaves  the  Government 
under  the  charge  of  Gutierrez,  in  anticipation  of  his  trip  to  Mexico  to  represent  the 
popular  disturbances  caused  by  the  Ayuntamiento  of  Monterey. 

Nicolas  Gutierrez,  1836. 

Acts  again  as  Governor,  ad  interim,  for  a  few  months. 

Juan  B.  Alvarado,  from  1836  to  1842. 

On  the  sixth  of  November,  1836,  the  Departmental  Assembly  declares  Califor- 
nia a  free  and  independent  State,  overthrows  Gutierrez,  who  leaves  the  country. 
On  the  twentieth  of  August,  1837,  Antonio  Carrillo  writes  to  Governor  Alvarado 
that  his  brother  Carlos  Antonio  Carrillo  had  been  appointed  Governor  by  the  Pres- 
ident. In  1838,  Alvarado  was  appointed  Governor,  ad  interim,  by  the  Supreme 
Government.  On  tlie  seventh  of  August,  1839,  he  was  appointed  permanent  Gov- 
ernor by  the  President. 

Manuel  Miciieltorena,  from  1842  to  1845. 
Appointed  Governor  by  the  President,  and  entered  on  the  duties  of  his  office  on 
he  thirtieth  of  December,  1842. 

Pio  Pico,  from  1845  to  1846. 
Became  Governor  as  first  vocal  of  the  Departmental  Assembly,  on  the  fifteenth 
of  February,  1845.  Having  been  recommended  l)y  the  Departmental  Assembly 
for  the  position  of  Governor  in  its  session  of  the  twenty-seventh  of  June,  1845,  on 
the  third  of  September,  of  that  year,  he  was  appointed  Constitutional  Governor 
by  the  President,  ad  interim,  of  Mexico.  Due  notice  of  his  appointment  waiS  pub- 
lished on  the  fifteenth  of  April,  1846. 


APPENDIX 


TABLE  OF  LAND  CLAIMS, 

Presented  to  the  Commission  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  the  Act 
OF  Congress  of  March  3d,  1851,  entitled  "An  Act  to  Ascertaiw 
AND  Settle  the  Private  Land  Claims  in  the  State  of  California." 


Note.— The  first  number  is  that  of  the  Commission;  tlae  second  is  the  number  of  the  District 
Court.  N.  D.  and  S,  D.  stand  for  Northern  or  Southern  District.  Where  there  is  a  third  or  other 
numbers  they  correspond  to  the  Jimeno  Index,  from  No.  1  to  No.  433,  and  to  Hartnell's  Index,  A 
continuation  of  Jimeno's  Index,  from  No.  434  to  No.  579. 


1,  1,  N.  D.,  352.     John  C.  Fremont,  claimant  for  Las  Mariposas,  10  square  leagues, 

in  Mariposa  county,  granted  February  29th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena 
to  Juan  Bautista  Alvarado;  claim  filed  January  21st,  1852,  confirmed  bj 
the  Commisssion  December  27th,  1852,  by  the  District  Court  June  27th,.  vvjm.* 
1854,  and  by  the  U.   S.   Supreme  Court  in  17  Howard,  542;  containing        ' 
44,386.83  acres.     Patented. 

2,  54,  N.  D.     Maria  de  la  Soledad,  Ortega  de  Arguello  et  als.,  claimants  for  Las 

Pulgas,  4  square  leagues,  in  San  Mateo  county,  granted  December  10th, 
183.5,  to  Luis  Arguello  ;  claim  filed  January  21st,  1852,  confirmed  by  th« 
Commission  October  2d,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  January  26th,  1855, 
and  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  iu  18  Howard,  539 ;  containing  35,240.47 
acres.    Patented. 


3,  2,  N.  D.,  266.  Archibald  Ritcliie,  claimant  for  Suisun,  4  square  leagues,  in 
Sonoma  county,  granted  January  28th,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
Francisco  Solano;  claim  filed  January  21st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission January  3d,  1852,  by  the  District  Court  November  8th,  1853,  and 
by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  in  17  Howard,  525;  containing  17,754.73 
acres. 


2  APPENDIX. 

4,  100,  N.  D.  Domingo  and  Vicente  Peralta,  claimants  for  San  Antonio,  in  Al- 
ameda county,  granted  August  16th,  1820^  by  Don  Pablo  Vicente  de  Sola 
\        to  Luis  Peralta;  claim  filed  January  21st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 

-^  sion  February  7th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  26th,  1855,  and  by 
the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  in  19  Howard,  343;  containing  19,143.86  acres. 


5,  297,  N.  D.     Thomas  Jefferson  Smith,  claimant  for  200  varas,  Mission  Dolores, 

in  San  Francisco  county,  granted  July  26th,  1843,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 

A        Domingo  Feliz  ;  claim  filed  January  21st,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission 

L/        March  20th,  1855,  and  for  failure  of  prosecution  appeal  dismissed  April 

21st,  1856. 


6,  416,  N.  D.,  250.  Roland  Gelston,  claimant  for  New  Helvetia,  11  square  leagues, 
in  Yuba  and  Slitter  counties,  granted  June  18th,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alva- 
rado to  John  A.  Sutter;  claim  filed  January  21st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  January  26th,  1856,  and  by  the  District  Court  November  25th, 
1859.     See  No.  92. 

—  7,  174,  N.  D.,  286.  Bernard  Murphy,  claimant  for  Las  Uvas,  3  square  leagues,  in 
Santa  Clara  county,  granted  June  14th,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Lo- 
renzo Pineda  ;  claim  filed  January  22d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
September  19th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  January  14th,  1856  ;  con- 
taining 11,079.93  acres. 

*■  8,  77,  N.  D.,  353.  Robert  F.  Stockton,  claimant  for  Potrero  de  Santa  Clara,  1 
square  league,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  February  29th,  1844,  by 
Manuel  Micheltorena  to  James  Alexander  Forbes ;  claim  filed  January 
24th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  November  15th,  1853,  and  by  the 
District  Court  October  29th,  1855  ;  containing  1,939.03  acres. 

—  9,  13,  S.  D.,  25.  William  G.  Dana,  claimant  for  Nipoma,  15  square  leagues,  in 
Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  April  6th,  1837,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
Guillermo  Dana;  claim  filed  January  26th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion March  1st,  1853,  and  dismissed  December  20th,  1856  ;  containing 
52,728.62  acres. 

10,  214,  N.  D.     Emilius  Voss,  claimant  for  Las  Mariposas,  11  square  Icauges,  in 

Mariposa  county,  granted  September  19th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena 
to  Manuel  Castauares ;  claim  filed  January  26th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission November  21st,  1854,  and  for  failure  of  prosecution  appeal  dis- 
missed April  21st,  1856. 

11,  299,  N.  D.     Joel  S.  Polack,  claimant  for  Island  of  Ycrba  Bucna,  in  Bay  of 

Sau  Francisco,  granted  November  8th,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Juan 
Jqs6  0astro  ;  claim  filed  January  27th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
May  22d,  1855,  and  rejected  by  the  District  Court  March  17th,  1858. 


APPENDIX.  3 

12,  13,  N.  D.,  462.  Archibald  A.  Ritchie,  claimant  for  Guenoc,  6  square  leagues, 
in  Sonoma  county,  granted  May  8th,  1845.  by  Pio  Pico  to  George  Rock  ; 
claim  filed  Jaimary  27th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December 
18th,  1852,  and  appeal  dismissed  December  15th,  1856  ;  containing  21,220.03 
acres. 

^—  13,  10,  S.  D.,  147.  Jos6  de  la  Guerra  y  Noriega,  claimant  for  San  Julian,  6 
square  leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  April  7th,  1837^  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado  to  George  Rock;  claim  filed  January  28th,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  February  21st,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  December 
17th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1859  ;  containing  48,221.68 
acres. 

14,  31,  N.  D.,  35.  Elam  Brown,  claimant  for  Acalanes,  1  square  league,  in  Con- 
tra Costa  county,  granted  August  1st,  1834^  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Cande- 
lario  Valencia;  claim  filed  February  2d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion February  14th,  1853,  and  appeal  dismissed  November  26th,  1856 ; 
containing  3,328.95  acres.     Patented. 


k'  —  15,  15,  S.  D.,  171.  Joaquin  and  Jose  A.  Carrillo,  claimants  for  Lompoc,  in  Santa 
Barbara  county,  granted  April  15th,  1837_,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Joaquin 
and  Jos6  A.  Carrillo ;  claim  filed  February  2d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  April  11th,  1853,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857; 
containing  38.335.78  acres. 

^  .mm  16,  52,  N.  D.,  254,  411.  Josefa  Carrillo  Fitch  et  al.,  claimants  for  Sotoyome,  8 
square  leagues,  in  Sonoma  and  Mendocino  counties,  granted  September 
28th,  1841,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Henry  D  Fitch;  claim  filed  Feb- 
ruary 2d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  18th,  1853,  and  appeal 
dismissed  November  17th,  1857;  containing  43,836.51  acres. 

^  17,  6,  N.  D.,  494.     Jose  de  Jesus  Noe,  claimant  for  San  Miguel,  1  square  league,  in 

San  Francisco  county,  granted  December  23d,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Jose  de 
Jesus  Noe;  claim  filed  February  2d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
December  18th,  1852,  and  appeal  dismissed  October  23d,  1856;  containing 
4,443.38  acres. 


IB,  208,  N.  D.  Antonio  Maria  Oslo,  claimant  for  Island  of  Los  Angeles,  in  San 
Francisco  county,  granted  June  11th,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Anto- 
nio Maria  Oslo;  claim  filed  February  2d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion October  24th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  September  10th,  1855,  and 
decree  reversed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  and  cause  remanded,  with  direc- 
tions to  dismiss  the  petition,  23  Howard,  273. 

—    19,  44,  N.  D.     Antonio  Cazares,  claimant  for  Canada  de  Pogolom^,  2  square 
leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  February  12th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Michel- 


4  APPENDIX. 

torena  to  Antonio  Cazarcs ;  claim  filed  February  3d,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  April  11th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  March  24th,  1856, 
and  appeal  dismissed  December  8th,  1856;  containing  8,780.81 'acres! 
Patented. 

20,  102,  S.  D.,  82.  Juan  Miguel  Anzar,  claimant  for  Los  Aromitas  y  Agua  Cali- 
ente,  3  square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  October  12th,  1835,  by 
Jose  Castro  to  Juan  Miguel  Anzar;  claim  filed  February  3d,  1852,^on- 
firmed  by  the  Commission  January  10th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  De- 
cember 10th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  21st,  1857;  containing 
8.659.69  acres. 

^  21,  75,  N.  D.,  220.  Maria  Luisa  Greer  et  al.,  claimants  for  Canada  de  Eaymundo, 
two  and  a  half  by  three-quarter  leagues,  in  San  Mateo  county,  granted  Au- 
gust 3d,  1840^  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  John  Coppinger ;  claim  filed  Febru- 
ary 3d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  November  29th,  1853,  by 
the  District  Court  January  14th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  November  11th, 
1856;  containing  12,545.01  acres.     Patented. 

<^.  22,  258,  S.  D.,  127.  Juan  Miguel  Anzar  and  Manuel  Larios,  claimants  for  Santa 
Ana,  1  square  league,  and  Quien  Sabe,  6  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Clara 
county,  granted  April  9th,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Manuel  Larios 
and  Juan  Anzar ;  claim  filed  February  6th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission November  7th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  11th,  1856, 
and  appeal  dismissed  June  4th,  1857  ;  48,822.60  acres.     Patented. 

>*  23,  35,  N.  D.,  308.  Stephen  Smith  and  Manuela  T.  Curtis,  claimants  for  Bodega, 
8  square  leagues,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  September  14th,  1844,  by 
Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Stephen  Smith;  claim  filed  February  9th, T852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  February  21st,  1853,  ])y  the  District  Court 
July  5th,  1855,  and  ajDpeal  dismissed  April  2d,  1857  ;  containing  35,487.53 
acres.     Patented. 

24,  224,  N.  D.,  280.  Stephen  Smith,  claimant  for  Blucher,  6  square  leagues,  in  So- 
noma county,  granted  October  14th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Juan 
Vioget;  claim  filed  February  9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  Oc- 
tober 31st,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  26th,  1857,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed April  2d,  1857  ;  containing  26,759.42  acres.     Patented. 

,pmt  25,  147,  N.  D.,  19.  Daniel  and  Bernard  Murphy  and  James  and  Martin  Murphy, 
claimants  for  San  Francisco  dc  Las  Llagas,  6  square  leagues,  in  Santa 
Clara  county,  granted  February  3d,  1834,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Carlos  Cas- 
tro;  claim  filed  February  9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  August 
22d,  1854,  by  the  Distinct  Court  October  22d,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed 
November  24th,  1856  ;  containing  22,979.66  acres. 

26,  162,  N.  D.     Dolores  Riesgo  Armijo  et  al.,  heirs  of  Jos^  F.  Armijo,  claimants 
for  Las  Tolenas,  3  square  leagues,  in  Solano  county,  granted  March  10th, 


APPENDIX.  T) 

1840j  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Jose'  Francisco  Armijo  ;  claim  filed  February 
9tli,  1852,  rejected  by  tlie  Connnission  Aug-ust  8th,  1854,  and  a])peal 
dismissed  November  24t!i,  1856;  containiiio-  13,315.93  acres. 

1^  27,  18,  N.  D.,  243.  Jose  Rafael  Gonzalez  and  Mariana  Gonzalez,  claimants  for  San 
Miguelito  de  Trinidad,  5  square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  July 
24tb,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Jos6  Kafael  Gonzalez ;  claim  filed  Feb- 
ruary 9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  March  1st,  1853,  by  the 
District  Court  September  24th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  17th, 
1857  ;  containing  22,135.89  acres. 

M«*«.  28,  4,  N.  D.  Pearson  B.  Reading,  claimant  for  Sau  Buenaventura,  6  square 
leagues,  in  Sacramento  county,  granted  December  4  th,  1^844,,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  P.  B.  Reading;  claim  filed  February  9th,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  December  18th,  1852,  by  the  District  Court  October 
31st,  1853,  and  by  the  U,  S.  Supreme  Court  in  18  Howard,  1  ;  containing 
26,632.09  acres.     Patented. 

>•'  29,  391,  N.  D.     Thomas  Dorland,  claimant  for  200  square  yards,  in  San  Francisco 

/  county,  (Mission  Dolores)  granted  by  Mariano  Castro  to  Toribio  Fanfiiran  ; 
claim  filed  February  9th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  September  25th, 
1855,  and  for  failure  of  prosecution  appeal  dismissed  March  30th,  1857. 


30,  5,  N.  D.,  177.  Carmen  Sibrian  de  Bernal  and  Jose  Cornelio  Bernal,  claimants  for 
Rincon  de  las  Salinas  y  Potrero  Nuevo,  1  square  league,  in  San  Francisco 
county,  granted  October  10th,  1839,  by  Manuel  Jimeno  to  Jose  Cornelio  de 
Bernal;  claim  filed  February  9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  De- 
cember 18th,  1852,  by  the  District  Court  August  20th,  1855,  and  appeal 
dismissed  December  8th,  1856;  containing  4,446.40  acres.     Patented. 

"-  31,  177,  S.  D.,  14,  145.  Isabel  Yorba,  claimant  for  Guadalasca,  in  Santa  Barbara 
county,  granted  May  6th,  1846,  by  Mariano  Chico  to  Isabel  Yorba ;  claim 
filed  February  9th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April  25th,  1854,  con- 
firmed by  the  District  Court  March  3d,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  Decem- 
ber 8th,  1856:  containino-  30,593.85  acres. 


32,  94,  N.  D.,  109.     Juan  Wilson,  claimant  for  Guilicos,  4  squai^e  leagues,  in  So- 

noma county,  granted  November  20th,  1847^  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  John 
Wilson;  claim  filed  February  10th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
December  27th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  March  3d,  1856,  and  appeal 
dismissed  December  8th,  1856  ;  containing  18,833.86  acres. 

33,  353,  N.  D.     Eustaquio  and  Jose  Ramon  Valencia,  claimants  for  200  varas 

square.  Mission  Dolores,  in  San  Francisco  county,  granted  July  18th,  1845, 
by  Mariano  Castro  to  Eustaquio  and  Jose  Ramon  Valencia ;  claim  filed 
February  11th,  1852,  and  rejected  by  the  Commission  July  3d,  1855. 


3 


6  APPENDIX. 

34,  389,  N.  D.  Candelario  Valencia,  claimant  for  50  varas  square.  Mission  Do- 
lores, in  San  Erancisco  county,  granted  November  18th,  1840,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado;  claim  filed  February  llth,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
August  14th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  December  28th,  1857,  and  appeal 
dismissed  December  28th,  1857. 


Candelario  Valencia,  claimant  for  100  varas  square.  Mission  Dolores,  in  San  Fran- 
cisco county,  granted  May  18th,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado. 

35,  57,  N.  D.,  347.     Sebastian  Nunez,  claimant  for  Orestimba,  6  square  leagues,  in 

Tuolumne  county,  granted  I'ebruary  21st,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to 
Sebastian  Nunez  ;  claim  filed  February  12th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commis- 
sion October  25th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  May  4tli,  1857, 
and  appeal  dismissed  September  3d,  1858;  containing  2G,641.17  acres. 

36,  36,  N.  D.,  6.     Maximo  Martinez,  claimant  for  El  Corte  de  Madera,  2  square 

leagues,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  May  1st,  1844,  by  Manuel  Michel- 
torena to  Maximo  Martinez  ;  claim  filed  February  12th,  1852,  confirmed 
\  by  the  Commission  February,  28th,  1 853,  by  the  District  Court  September 

10th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  April  2d,  1857;  containing  13,316.05 
acres.    Patented. 


37,  62,  N.  D.,  315.  Juan  Perez  Pacheco,  claimant  for  San  Luis  Gonzaga,  in  Mar- 
iposa county,  granted  December  3d,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Fran- 
cisco Rivera;  claim  filed  February  12th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
October  18th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  April  21st,  1856,  and 
appeal  dismissed  September  3d,  1858;  containing  48,821.43  acres. 


38,  103,  S.  D.,  271.  Jose  de  la  Guerra  y  Noriega,  claimant  for  San  Jose  de  Gracia 
or  Simi,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  1J795'  ^J  Borica  to  Patricio  Ja- 
vier y  Miguel  Pico,  and  revalidated  by  J.  B.  Alvarado  April  25th,  1842; 
claim  filed  February  12th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  March  14th, 
1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  December  20th,  1856;  containing  92,341.38. 
acres. 


^  39,  11,  S.  D.  Victor  Linares,  claimant  for  1,000  varas  square,  in  San  Luis  Obispo 
county,  granted  September  18th,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Victor  Li- 
nares;  claim  filed  February  12th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
March  14th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  January  14th,  1857,  and  appeal 
dismissed  June  3d,  1859  ;  containing  165.76  acres. 

40,  14,  N.  D.,  383.  Arch.  A.  Ritchie  and  Paul  S.  Forl)es,  claimants  for  Callayomi, 
3  square  leagues,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  January  17tli,  1845,  by  Man- 
uel Micheltorena  to  Robert  F.  Ridley;  claim  filed  February  12th,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  December  22d,  1852,  and  appeal  dismissed 
December  8th,  1856  ;  containing  8,241.74  acres. 


APPENDIX.  J      ..       /. 

y^  -*  41,  14,  S.  D.,  144.  Ramona  Carrillo  de  Wilson,  claimant  for^5  square  leagues, 
granted  April  6th,  1837,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Ramona  Carrillo;  claim 
filed  February  12th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  11th,  1853, 
and  by  the  District  Court  January  8th,  1857. 

•^  ^  42,  345,  N.  D.  James  and  Squire  Williams,  claimants  for  1  square  league,  granted 
June  12th,  1840,  by  Juan  B.  Ah^arado  to  Gil  Sanchez  ;  claim  filed  Febru- 
ary 17th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  July  10th,  1855,  and  appeal 
dismissed  December  24th,  1856. 

/^  —  43,  95,  N.  D.,  488.  Manuel  Torres,  claimant  for  Muniz,  4  square  leagues,  in  Men- 
docino county,  granted  December  4th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Manuel  Torres  ; 
claim  filed  February  17th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December 
27th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  October  17th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed 
May  7th,  1857  ;  containing  17,760.75  acres.     Patented. 

1^  44,  61,  N.  D.,  483.,    Bartolom6  Bojorquez,  claimant  for  Laguna  de  San  Antonio,  6 

square  leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  November  5th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  ' 

to  B.  Bojorquez;  claim  filed  February  l7th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission October  12th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  September  10th,  1855, 
and  appeal  dismissed  November  24th,  1856  ;  containing  24,903.42  acres.  - 

*5^  ___  45,  397.  Thomas  B.  Valentine,  claimant  for  Arroyo  de  San  Antonio,  3  square 
leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  October  8th,  1844,  by.  Manuel  Michelto- 
rena  to  Juan  Miranda;  claim  filed  February  17th,  1852,  and  discontinued 
February  6th,  1855. 

^  46.     Thomas  Jefferson  Smith,  claimant  for  200  varas.  Mission  Dolores,  in  San 

Francisco  county,  granted  August  20th,  1842,  to  Domingo  Feliz ;  claim 
filed  February  17th,  1852  ;  included  in  No.  5.  '' 

47,  211,  S.  D.     Francisco  Perez  Pacheco,  claimant  for  San  Justo,  4  square  leagues, 
in  Monterey  county,  granted  April  15th,   1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
Jose  Castro;  claim  filed  February  17th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion September  26th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  June  3d,  1857,  and  appeal      — 
dismissed  June  8th,  1857  ;  containing  33,689.99  acres. 

^  _^__^  48,  24,  S.  D.     Francisco  Branch,  claimant  for  Santa  Manuela,  in  San  Luis  Obispo 

county,  granted  April  6th,  1837,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Francisco  Branch  ;     ' 
claim  filed  February  17th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  March  1st, 
1853,  by  the  District  Court  October  16th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  Feb- 
ruary 24th,  1857  ;  containing  16,954.83  acres, 

^  — -*  49,  32,  S.  D.,  100.  Carlos  Antonio  Carrillo,  claimant  for  Sespe,  6  square  leagues, 
in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  November  9th,  1833,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to 
C.  A.  Carrillo  ;  claim  filed  February  17th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion April  18th,  1853,  and  by  the  District  Court  February  19th,  1856. 


8  APPENDIX. 

——  50,  261,  S.  D.  John  Wilson,  claimant  for  Huerta  de  Eomaldo,  one-tenth  square 
league,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  1842  by  J.  B.  Alvarado,  and 
July  10th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico,  to  Roraaldo  ;  claim  filed  February  17th,  1852, 
rejected  by  the  Commission  December  12th,  1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  Dis- 
trict Court  February  9th,  1857. 


53,  S.  D.,  553.  Fernando  Tico,  claimant  for  400  varas.  Mission  of  San  Buena- 
ventura, in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  March  24th,  1845^  by  Pio  Pico  to 
F.  Tico  ;  claim  filed  February  17th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  No- 
vember 23d,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  January  7th,  1856,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed February  5th,  1857  ;  containing  28.90  acres. 


■m  52,  159,  N.  D.  Bernard  Murphy,  claimant  for  La  Polka,  1  square  league,  in 
Santa  Claia  county,  granted  January  19th,  1833,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to 
Ysabel  Ortega;  claim  filed  February  17th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission August  15th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  14th,  1856, 
and  appeal  dismissed  January  18th,  1856  ;  containing  4,166.78  acres. 


$3, 148,  N.  D.,  361.  Domingo  Feliz,  claimant  for  Feliz  Rancho,  1  square  league,  in 
San  Mateo  county,  granted  May  1st,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  D. 
Feliz;  claim  filed  February  17th,  1852,'  confirmed  by  the  Commission  Jan- 
uary 27th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  October  29th,  1855,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed November  18th,  1856;  containing  4,448.27  acres. 


54,  4,  S.  D.,  94.  David  S.  Spence,  claimant  for  Encinal  y  Buena  Esperanza,  2 
square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  November  29th,  1834,  by  Jos6 
Figueroa  to  D.  S.  Spence ;  1  square  league  additional,  in  Monterey  county, 
granted  April  15th,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  ;  claims  filed  February  19th, 
1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  February  14th,  1853,  by  the  District 
Court  December  19th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  23d,  1857  ;  con- 
taining 13,351.64  acres. 

^  55,  370,  S.  D.  Francisco  Castillo  Negrete,  claimant  for  Quien  Sabe,  6  square 
leagues,  in  San  Joaquin  county,  granted  April  16th,  1836,  by  Nicolas  Gu- 
tierrez to  F.  C.  Negrete;  claim  filed  February  20th,  1852,  and  rejected  by 
the  Commission  September  11th,  1855. 

4  56,  178,  S.  D.,  156.  Cruz  Cervantez,  claimant  for  San  Joaquin  or  Rosas  Morada, 
2  square  feagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  April  1st,  1836,  by  Nicolas 
Gutierrez  to  C.  Cervantes;  claim  filed  February  20th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  December  18th,  1852,  by  the  District  Court  September 
21st,  1855,  and  judgment  affirmed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  in  18  How- 
ard, 553. 

^     57,  74,  N.  D.,  465.     Juan  Manuel  Vaca  and  Juan  Felipe  Peila,  claimants  for 


APPENDIX.  9 

Los  Putos,  10  square  leagues,  in  Solano  county,  grantcflJanuary  27th,  1843, 
by  Manuel  Michel torena  to  J.  M.  Vaca  and  J.  E.  Pcfia  ;  claim  filed  Febru- 
ary 20th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  November  15th,  1853,  confirmed 
by  the  District  Court  July  5th,  1855,  and  decree  affirmed  by  the  U.  S. 
Supreme  Court  in  18  Howard,  556  ;  containing  44,383,78  acres.     Patented. 


161,  N.  1).  Jose  de  los  Santos  Berreyesa,  claimant  for  Sefio  de  Mallacomes 
or  Moristal  y  Plan  de  Agua  Caliente,  4  square  leagues,  in  Sonoma  county, 
granted  October  14th,  1843,  by  Manuel  MicheltorenatoJ.de  los  Santos 
Berreyesa;  claim  filed  February  20th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
Jxme  27th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  24th,  1856,  and  appeal 
dismissed  November  24th,  1856;  containing  12.540.22  acres. 


59,  150,  N.  D.  LovettP.  Rockwell  and  Thomas  P.  Knight,  claimants  for  portion 
of  Mallacomes  or  Moristal,  No.  58,  2  square  leagues,  in  Sonoma  county, 
granted' October  J 4th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Jose  de  los  Santos 
Berreyesa;  claim  filed  February  20th,  1852,  coijfirmed  by  the  Commission 
August  29th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  November  24th,  1856  ;  containing 
8,328.85  acres. 


60,  155,  N.  D.,  ^28.  Jose  Dolores  Pacheco,  claimant  for  Santa  Pita,  in  Alameda 
county,  granted  April  10th,  1_839,  by  JuanB.  Alvarado  to  J.  D.  Pacheco ;  claim 
filed  February  21st,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April  25th,  1854, 
confirmed  by  the  District  Coiirt  August  13th,  1855,  and  decree  affirmed  by 
the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  in  23  Howard,  495;  containing  8,885.67  acres. 

-*  61,  8,  S.  D.,  290.  Rafael  Vilavicencio,  claimant  for  San  Geronimo,  2  square 
leagues,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  July  24{h,  1842,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  R.  Vilavicencio  ;  claim  filed  February  21st,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  February  14th,  1853,  and  by  the  District  Court  October 
14th,  1859. 

— *  62,  9,  N.  D.,  143.  Antonio  and  Faustin  German,  claimants  for  Juristac,  1  square 
league,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  October  22d,  1835,  to  A.  and  F. 
.German;  claim  filed  February  21st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
December  18th,  1852,  by  the  District  Court  June  7th,  1855,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed April  28th,  1857  ;  containing  4,482.41  acres. 


63,  79,  S.  D.,  149.  Francisco  Perez  Pacheco,  claimant  for  2  square  leagues,  in 
Monterey  county,  granted  November  26tli,  1833^  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  F.  P. 
Pacheco ;  by  another  grant,  claimant  for  Ausaymas,  2  square  leagues,  in 
Tuolumne  county,  granted  February  6th,  1836,  by  Nicolas  Gutierrez; 
claims  filed  February  24th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  July  5th, 
1853,  and  by  the  District  Court  October  10th,  1855;  containing  35,504.34 
acres.     Patented. 


10  APPENDIX. 

64,  78,  S.  D,     Francisco  Perez  Pacheco,  claimant  for  San  Felipe,  3  square  leagues, 

in  Monterey  county,  granted  April  1st,  1836,  by  Nicolas  Gutierrez  to  F.  D. 
Pacheco  ;  claim  filed  February  24th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
July  5th,  1853,  and  by  the  District  Court  October  Uth,  1855.  Surveyed 
with  No.  63  and  patented. 

65,  77,  S.  D.,  212.     Francisco  Perez  Pacheco,  claimant  for  Bolsa  de  San  Felipe, 

2  square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  October  14th,  1840,  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado  to  F.  D.  Pacheco ;  claim  filed  February  Uth,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  December  29th,  1852,  by  the  District  Court  February 
19th,  1857,  and  January  11th,  1861,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858. 

—  66,  39,  S.  D.,  122.  Diego  Olivera  and  Teodoro  Arellanes,  claimants  for  Guada- 
lupe, described  by  boundaries,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  March 
21st,  1840j  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  D.  Olivera  and  T.  Arellanes  ;  claim 
filed  February  24th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December  6th, 
1853,  by  the  District  Court  September  25th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  Feb- 
ruary 5th,  1857  ;  containing  32,408.03  acres. 

-^  67,  365,  S.  D.,  523.  Maria  Antonio  de  la  Guerra  and  Lataillade,  claimants  for 
Cuyama,  5  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  April  24th, 
1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Jose  Maria  Rojo ;  claim  filed  February 
24th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  July  17th,  ]  855,  by  the  District 
Court  January  20th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858  ;  contain- 
ing 22,198.74  acres. 

68,  223,  N.  D.,  188.  Assignee  of  Bezer  Simmons,  claimant  for  Novato,  2  square 
leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  April  16th,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
Fernando  Feliz ;  claim  filed  February  24th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission November  7tli,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  December  16th,  1856; 
containing  8,870.62  acres. 

—  69,  30,  N.  D.,  484.  David  Wright,  claimant  for  Roblar  de  la  Miseria,  4  square 
leagues,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  November  21st,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to 
Juan  Nepomaseno  Padillo  ;  claim  filed  February  24th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  February  14th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  September  10th, 
1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  December  8th,  1856  ;  containing  16,887.45  acres. 
Patented. 

»^  70,  411,  N.  D.  Edmund  L.  Brown  ct  al.,  claimants  for  Laguna  de  Santos  Calle, 
11  square  leagues,  in  Yolo  county,  granted  December  29th,  1845,  by  Pio 
Pico  to  Victor  Prudon  and  Marcos  Baca;  claim  filed  February  24tli,  1852, 
rejected  by  the  Commission  January  15tli,  1856,  and  by  the  District  Court 
September  18th,  1860. 

71,  10  N.  D.,  320.  Camilo  Ynitia,  claimant  for  Olompali,  2  square  leagues,  in 
Marin  county,  granted  October  22d,  1843^  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  C. 


APPENDIX.  11 

Ynitia;  claim  filed  February  26tli,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  De- 
cember 18th,  1852,  by  the  District  Court  Eebruary  23d,  1857,  and  appeal 
dismissed  July  31st,  1857  ;  containing  8,877.43  acres. 

»  72,  16,  N.  D.,  346.    Timotco  Murphy,  claimant  for  San  Pedro,  Santa  Margarita  and 

Las  Gallinas,  5  square  leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  February  14th, 
1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  T.  Murphy;  claim  filed  February  26tli, 
l'8527  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December  22d,  1852,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed November  18th,  1856;  containing  21,678.69  acres. 

Q^  '^^  73,  202,  N.  D.  Julian  and  Fernando,  t-ons  of  Santos,  a  neophite,  claimants  for 
Rincon  del  Alisal,  600  varas,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  December 
28th,  18-A,  by  Jose  Maria  del  Ray  (priest)  to  Santos  and  Sons  ;  claim  filed 
February  27th,  1852,  rcyected  by  the  Commission  November  21st,  1854,  and 
for  failure  of  prosecution  appeal  dismissed  by  the  District  Court  April  21st, 
1856. 


y 


74,  421,  N.  D.     Jacob  Leese  and  Salvador  Vallejo,  claimants  for  200  by  100  varas,       p. 
in  city  of  San  Francisco,  granted  May  21st,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to   ---^.^ 
Jacob  Leese  and  S.  Vallejo ;  claim  filed  February  27th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  February  5th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  April  6th,  1857  ;     -«-« 
containing:  3.38  acres.     Patented. 


«-  75,  7,  N.  D.,  364.  Jose  Agustin  Narvaez,  claimant  for  San  Juan  Bautista,  2 
square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  March  30th,  1844,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  J.  A.  Narvaez ;  claim  filed  February  27th,  1852,  rejected 
by  the  Commission  November  15th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court 
July  15th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  July  5th,  1855;  containing  8,877.60 
acres. 

76,  20,  N.  D.,  64.     Salvio  Pacheco,  claimant  for  Monte  del  Diablo,  in  Contra  Costa 

county,  granted  March  30th,  1844,  by  Jose  Figucroa  to  S.  Pacheco ;  claim 
filed  February  27th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  5th,  1853, 
by  the  District  Court  January  14th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  November 
24th,  1856;  containing  17,921.54  acres.     Patented. 

77,  135,  N.  D.,  129.     Jose  Noriega  and  Roberto  Livermore,  claimants  for  Las 

Positas,  2  square  leagues,  in  Alameda  county,  granted  April  10th,  1839,  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Salvio  Pacheco ;  claim  filed  February  27th,  18527con- 
firmed  by  the  Commission  February  14th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court 
February  18th,  1859. 

78,  133,  N.  D.,  125.     Fulgencio  Higuera,  claimant  for  Agua  Caliente,  2  square 

leagues,  in  Alameda  county,  granted  October  13th,  1836,  by  Nicolas  Gutier- 
rez, and  April  4th,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado,  to  F.  Higuera;  claim  filed 
February  27th,  1852,  confirmed  by  tbe  Commission  February  14th,  1854, 
and  appeal  dismissed  November  24th,  1856;  containing  9,563.87  acres. 
Patented. 


12  APPENDIX. 

79,  386,  N.  D.,  431.     Robert  Livcrmore,  claimant  for  Canada  dc  los  Yaqueros,  in 

Contra  t!osta  connty,  granted  Febrnary  29th,  1844,  by  Mannel  Michelto- 
rena  to  Francisco  Alvisu  et  al. ;  claim  filed  February  27th,  1852,  confii-med 
by  the  Commission  September  4th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  December 
28th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  December  28th,  1857. 

80,  210,  N.  D.     Timothy  Murphy,  in  behalf  of  the  San  Rafael  tribe  of  Indians, 

claimant  for  Tinicasia,  1  square  league,  in  Marin  county,  granted  in  ISil^ 
by  M,  G.  Vallcjo  to  San  Rafael  tribe  of  Indians  ;  claim  filed  February  28th, 
1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  November  21st,  1854,  and  for  failure 
of  prosecution  appeal  dismissed  April  21st,  1856. 

81,  338,  N.  D.     James  R.  Bolton,  claimant  for  Mission  Dolores,  3  square  leagues, 

in  San  Francisco  county,  granted  February  10th,  1846,  )>y  Pio  Pico  to  Jos6 
Prudcncio  Santillan;  claim  filed  March  1st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission January  5th,  1855,  pro  forma  by  the  District  Court  April  7th,  1857, 
and  decrees  reversed  by  the  U.  S.  Siqjrcme  Court  and  cause  remanded,  with 
direction  to  dismiss  the  claim,  23  Howard,  341. 


82,  60,  N.  D.,  318.  Jose  de  Jesus  Vallejo,  claimant  for  Arroyo  del  Alameda,  4 
square  leagues,  in  Alameda  county,  granted  August  30th,  1842,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  J.  de  Jesus  Vallejo;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  October  18th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857, 
and  appeal  dismissed  July  28th,  1857;  containing  17,705.38  acres.  Pat- 
ented. 


—  83,  59,  N.  D.,  216,  318.  Jose  de  Jesus  Vallejo,  claimant  for  Arroyo  del  Ala- 
meda, 1,000  varas  square,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  December  30th, 
1840,  by  Manuel  Jimeno  to  J.  dc  Jesus  Vallcjo  ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1852, 
and  rejected  by  the  Commission  October  18th,  1853. 

84,  65,  N.  I).,   167.     Domingo  Sais,  claimant  for  Canada  de  Herrera,  one-half 

square  league,  in  Marin  county,  granted  August  10th,  1839,  by  Manuel  Ji- 
meno to  D.  Sais;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1852,  confirmecT by  the  Commis- 
sion October  21st,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  May  25th,  1858,  and  appeal 
dismissed  May  25th,  1858;  containing  6,658.35  acres. 

85,  35,  S.  D.     Jose  de  Jesus  Vallejo,  claimant  for  Bolsa  de  San  Cayetano,  2  square 
.  ^    leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  October  25th,  1824,  by  Arguello,  and 

October  13th,  1834,  by  Jose  Figueroa,  to  Ignacio  Vallejo;  claim  filed 
March  2d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December  6th,  1853,  by  the 
District  Court  February  1st,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  9th,  1857  ; 
(ibntaining  8,866.43  acres. 

86,  48,  N.  D.,  501.     Jasper  O'Farrell,  claimant  for  Canada  de  la  Jonive,  2  square 

leagues,"  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  February  5th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to 


APPENDIX.  13 

James  Black;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
April  18th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  July  16th,  1855,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed December  22d,  1856  ;  containing-  10,786.51  acres.     Patented. 

^-^  87,  196,  S.  D.,  282,  506.  Francis  Branch,  claimant  for  Huerhuero  or  Huerfano, 
1  square  league,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  May  9th,  1842,  by 
Juan  B,  Alvarado,  and  March  28th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico,  to  Mariano  Bonilla ; 
claim  filed  March  2d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  September  12th, 
1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  31st,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  Feb- 
ruary 24th,  1857  ;  containing  15,684.95  acres. 

-—  88,  64,  S.  D.,  451.  Antonio  Maria  Villa,  claimant  for  Tequepis,  2  square  leagues, 
in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  May  24th,  1845^by  Pio  Pico  to  Joaquin 
Villa;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1852,  rejected  bylhe  Commission  November 
13th,  1853,  confirmed  bj  the  District  Court  January  14th,  1856,  and  appeal 
dismissed  February  5th,  1857  ;  containing  8,919  acres. 

—  89,  166,  N.  D.,  550.  James  G.  Morehead,  claimant  for  Carmel,  10  square  leagues, 
granted  May  4th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  William  Knight;  claim  filed  p^arch 
2d,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  February  21st,  1854,  confirmed  by 
the  District  Court  September  29th,  1859,  and  appeal  dismissed  October 
26th,  1859. 


^  90,  84,  N.  D,,  265.  Martin  Murphy,  claimant  for  Pastoria  de  las  Borregas,  3,207:^ 
acres,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  January  15th,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Al- 
varado to  Francisco  Estrada;  claim  filed  March  3d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  January  24th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  October  17th,  1856, 
and  appeal  dismissed  November  18th,  1856  ;  containing  4,894.35  acres. 

—  91,  397,  N.  D.  William  Johnson,  claimant  for  Johnson's  Rancho,  5  square  leagues, 
in  Yuba  county,  granted  December  22d,  1,844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  and 
J.  A.  Sutter  to  Pablo  Gutierrez  ;  claim  filed  March  3d,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  August  7th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  November  18th, 
1856;  containing  22,197.31  acres.     Patented. 

92,  319,  N.  D.,  250.  John  A.  Sutter,  claimant  for  New  Helvetia,  11  s(juare  leagues, 
and  a  surplus  of  22  square  leagues,  in  Yuba  and  Sutter  counties,  granted 
June  18tli,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado,  and  February  25th,  1845,  by  Man- 
uel Micheltorena,  to  J.  A.  Sutter;  claim  filed  March  8th,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  May  15th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  January  14th, 
1857,  grant  of  June  18tli,  1841,  confirmed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court,  and 
that  of  February  5th,  1845,  rejected,  21  Howard,  170;  containing  48,827.90 
acres. 


-^  93,  213,  N.  D.,  92,     Antonio  Cbaboya,  claimant  for  Yerba  Buena  or  Socayre,  in 
Santa  Clara  county,  granted  November  5th,  1833,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  A. 


14  APPENDIX. 

Chaboya;  claim  filed  March  8tli,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  Oc- 
tober 17th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  21st,  1858,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed October  8th,  1858;  containing  24,342.64  acres.     Patented. 

'  w  94,  262,  N.  D.,  552.     Abel  Stearns,  claimant  for  600  varas  square,  in  San  Fran- 

cisco county,  granted  May  6th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Jose  Andrada;  claim 
filed  March  9th,  1852,  and  rejected  by  the  Commission  January  25th,  1855. 

y  -^  95,  379,  N.  D.  ;  19  S.  D.,  (transcript  sent  to  N.  D.)  29.  Bernard  Murphy,  claim- 
ant for  Ojo  de  Agua  de  la  Coche,  2  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Clara  county, 
granted  August  4th,  1835,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Juan  Maiia  Hernandez  ; 
claim  filed  March  9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  February  21st, 
1853,  by  the  District  Court  January  18th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  No- 
vember 18th,  1856  ;  containing  8,927.10  acres. 

y  _  96,  403,  N.  D.  Juan  Jose  Castro,  claimant  for  El  Sobrante,  11  square  leagues,  in 
Alameda  county,  granted  April  23d,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  J.  J. 
Castro;  claim  filed  March  9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  July 
3d,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  April  6th,  1857. 

--  97  101,  N.  D.,  20.  Jose  de  la  Cruz  Sanchez  et  al.,  claimant  for  Buri-Buri,  in  San 
Mateo  county,  granted  September  18th,  1835,  by  Jose  Castro  to  Jos6  San- 
chez; claim  filed  March  9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  January 
31st,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  October  16th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed 
May  11th,  1858  ;  containing  15,739.14  acres. 

98,  71,  S.  D.,  342.     Ellen  E.  White,  claimant  for  Cholam,  6  square  leagues,  in 

San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  February  7th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Michel- 
torena  to  Mauricio  Gonzalez  ;  claim  filed  March  12th,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  January  I7th,  1854,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  March 
4th,  1858,  and  appeal  dismissed  December  31st,  1860;  containing  26,627.16 
acres. 

99,  375,  S.  D.     Ellen  E.   White  and  John  Carney,  claimants  for  San  Justo  el 

Viejo  and  San  Bernab6,  6  square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted 
February  18th,  1836,  by  Nicolas  Gutierrez  to  Rafael  Gonzalez;  claim  filed 
March  12th,  1852,  Rejected  by  the  Commission  August  28th,  1855,  and  for 
failure  of  prosecution  appeal  dismissed  December  22d,  1856. 

100,  219,  N.  D.     Francisco  Eufino,  claimant  for  preemption  claim,  50  by  180  feet, 

Mission  Dolores,  in  San  Francisco  county;  claim  filed  March  13th,  1852, 
rejected  by  the  Commission  November  21st,  1854,  and  for  failure  of  prose- 
cution appeal  dismissed  April  21st,  1856. 

101,  381,  N.  D.,  360.     Josefa  de  Haro  et  ah,  claimants  for  Potrero  de  San  Fran- 

Cisco,  one-half  square  league,  in  San  Francisco  county,  granted  April  30th, 


APPENDIX.  15 

1844,  and  May  1st,  1844,  by  Manuel  Miclicltorcna  to  Ramon  Francisco  de 
Haro ;  claim  filed  March  16th,  1852,  and  confirmed  by  the  Commission  No- 
vember 6th,  1855. 

102,  380,  N.  D.,  10.    Josefa  do  Haro  et  aL,  claimants  for  Laguna  dc  la  Merced,  1 

by  one-half  league,  in  San  Mateo  county,  granted  September  27th,  1^35,  by 
Joso  Castro  to  Jose  Antonio  Galindo;  claim  filed  March  16th,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  tlie  Commission  July  24th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  January 
13th,  1858,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  19th,  1858;  containing  2,220.16 
acres. 

103,  408,  N.  D.     Guillermo  Antonio  Richardson,  claimant  for  10  by  2  leagues, 

in  Mendocino  county,  granted  October  30th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena 
to  Jose  Antonio  Galindo;  claim  filed  March  16th,  1852,  and  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  November  6th,  1855. 

104,  83,  N.  D.,   111.     Guillermo  Antonio  Richardson,  claimant  for  Saucelito, 

3  square  leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  February  11th,  1835,  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado  to  Jose  Antonio  Galindo;  claim  filed  March  16th,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  December  27th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  Feb- 
ruary 11th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  September  2d,  1857;  containing 
19,571.92  acres. 

105,  281,  N.  D.     Timoteo  Murphy,  claimant  for  100  by  30  varas,  in  Marin  county, 

granted  December  16th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  T.  Murphy; 
claim  filed  March  16th,  1852,  and  rejected  by  the  Commision  August  22d, 
1854,  and  March  27th,  1855. 

106,  91,  N.  D.,  405.     Alberto  J.  Toomes,  claimant  for  El  Rio  de  los  Molinos,  5 

square  leagues,  in  Tehama  county,  granted  December  20th,  1844,  by  Man- 
uel Miclieltorena  to  A.  J.  Toomes  ;  claim  filed  March  18th,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  January  l7th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  March  3d, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  November  6th,  1856;  containing  22,172.46 
acres.     Patented. 

107,  85,  N,  D.,  404.     Robert  H.   Thomes,  claimant  for  Los   Sancos,  5  square 

leagues,  in  Tehama  county,  granted  December  20th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Mi- 
cheltorena to  R.  H.  Thomes;  claim  filed  March  18th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  January  17th,  1854,  by  the  District  Coui-t  February  4th, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  November  6th,  1856;  containing  22,212.21 
acres. 

108,  323,  N.  D.    Jacob  D,  Hoppe,  claimant  for  Ulistac,  one-half  square  league, 

in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  May  19th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Marcelo 
Pio  and  Cristoval;  claim  filed  March  19th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission May  8th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857,  and  appeal 
dismissed  April  16th,  1857  ;  containing  2,401.32  acres. 


16  APPENDIX. 

109,  377,  N.  D.  Dionisio  Z.  Fernandez  et  al.,  claimants  for  4  square  leagues,  in 
Butte  county,  granted  June  12th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Dionisio  and  Max- 
imo Fernandez  ;  claim  filed  March  r9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion July  17th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed March  9th,  1857  ;  containing  17,805.84  acres. 


110,  407,  N.  D.  Andres  Pico  et  al.,  claimants  for  Mission  San  Jose,  30,000  acres, 
in  Alameda  county,  granted  May  5th,  1846,  By  Pio  Pico  to  Andres  Pico 
and  Juan  B.  Alvarado ;  claim  filed  March  22d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  December  18th,  1855,  and  rejected  by  the  District  Court  June 
30th,  1859. 


—  Ill,  310,  S.  D.,  442.  James  B.  Huie,  claimant  for  Sisquoc,  in  Santa  Barbara 
county,  granted  June  3d,  1 833,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Maria  Antonio  Caballero ; 
claim  filed  March  22d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  24th,  1855, 
and  appeal  dismissed  February  21st,  1857  ;  containing  35,485.90  acres. 

— ^  112,  216,  N.  D.;  197,  S.  D.,  (transcript  sent  to  N.  D.)  Quintin  Ortega  et  al, 
claimants  for  San  Isidro,  1  square  league,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted 
June  3d,  1833,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Quintin  Ortega  et  al. ;  claim  filed  March 
23d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  September  19th,  1854,  and  by  the 
District  Court  June  3d,  1856  ;  containing  4,438.70  acres. 


113,  96,  N.  D.     Rafael  Garcia,  claimant  for  9  square  leagues,  in  Mendocino  county, 

granted  November  1 5t]i,  1 844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Rafael  Garcia ; 
claim  filed  March  23d,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  January  17th, 
1854,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court,  decree  reversed,  petition  dis- 
missed by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court,  and  cause  remanded  for  that  purpose 
in  22  Howard,  274.  fi.-OjJuXj^ 

1 14,  68,  N.  D.,  124.     Rafael  Garcia,'  claimant  for  Tomales  and  Baulinas,  2  square 

leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  March  19th,  1836,  by  Nicolas  Gutierrez 
to  Rafael  Garcia;  claim  filed  March  23d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion November  22d,  1853,  and  appeal  dismissed  October  19th,  1858;  con- 
taining 8,863.25  acres. 

115,  233,  S.  D.,  319.     Jos6  Antonio  Estudillo,  claimant  for  San  Jacinto,  4  square 

leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  December  21st,  1842,  by  Manuel  Ji- 
meno  to  J.  A.  Estudillo;  claim  filed  March  23d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  November  21st,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  March  5th, 
1858. 

116,  80,  S.  1).,  512.     Jos6  Antonio  Aguirre,  in  right  of  his  wife,  claimant  for  So- 

brante  of  Jacinto  Viejo  y  Nuevo,  5  square  leagues,  in  San  Diego  county, 
granted  May  9th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Maria  del  Rosario  Estudillo  de 


APPENDIX.  17 

Aguirre  ;  claim  filed  March  23cl,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  January 
17tli,  1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Com't  December  24th,  1855. 

—  117,  56,  S.  D.,  313.  Mannela  Carrillo  de  Jones,  claimant  for  Santa  Kosa  Island, 
describe^by  boundaries,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  October  4th, 
1843^  by  Manuel  Michcltorcna  to  Jos6  Antonio  and  Carlos  Carrillo  ;  claim 
filed  March  23d,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  November  15th,  1853, 
confirmed  by  the  District  Court  January  18th,  1856,  and  ai:)peal  dismissed 
February  5th,  1857. 

ly  —•118,  81,  S.  D.,  _304.  Joaquiua  Alvarado,  claimant  for  Canada  Larga  6  Verde, 
one-half  square  league,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  June  30th,  1841, 
by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  J.  Alvarado  ;  claim  filed  March  23d,  1852,  reje'cted 
by  the  Commission  December  20th,  1853,  and  confirmed  by  the  District 
Coui-t  January  20th,  1857. 

-—   119,  130,  N.  D.     Juana  Briones,  claimant  for  La  Purisima  Concepcion,  1  square 

league,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  June  30th,  1840,  by  Juan  B.  Alva- 
rado to  Jose  Gorgonio  and  Jose  Ramon;  claim  filed  March  23d,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  April  11th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  April 
17th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  December  24th,  1856 ;  containing  4,436.74 
acres, 

y  -— '  120,  104,  S.  D.,  569.  Maria  Antonia  de  la  Guerra  y  Lataillade,  claimant  for  Cuy- 
ama,  11  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  June  9th,  1846, 
by  Pio  Pico  to  Cesario  Lataillade ;  claim  filed  March  23d,  1852,  and  rejected 
by  the  Commission  February  28th,  1854. 

i.  —  121,  188,  S.  D.,  410.  Luis  Arellanes  and  Emilio  Miguel  Ortega,  claimants  for 
La  Punta  de  la  Laguna,  6  square  leagues,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county, 
granted  December  26th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  L.  Arellanes  and 
E.  M.  Ortega;  claim  filed  March  23d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
May  2d,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  7th,  1856,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed February  5th,  1857  ;  containing  26,648.42  acres. 

V  -^  122,  12,  N.  D.,  414.  Francisco  Dye,  claimant  for  El  Primer  CaSon  or  Rio  de  los 
Berendos,  6  square  leagues,  in  Tehama  county,  granted  May  22d,  1844,  by 
Manuel  Micheltorena  to  F.  Dye;  claim  filed  March  2M,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  December  18th,  1852,  by  the  District  Court  July  23d, 
1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  10th,  1857;  containing  26,637.11 
acres. 

Z'  -^  123,  41,  S.  D.,  192.  Vicente  Cane,  claimant  for  San  Bernardo,  1  square  league, 
in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  February  11  th^  1840,  by  Juan  B.  Alva- 
rado to  Vicente  Cane  ;  claim  filed  March  23d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission November  22d,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  September  25th,  1855, 
and  appeal  dismissed  February  5th,  1856  ;  containing  4,379.42  acres. 
B 


l^ 


18  APPENDIX. 

124,  1,  S.  D.,  34.  John  B.  R.  Cooper,  claimant  for  El  Sur,  2  square  leagues,  in 
Monterey  county,  granted  September  30th,  1834,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Juan 
B.  Alvarado ;  claim  filed  March  23d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
December  18th,  1852,  by  the  District  Court  September  21st,  1855,  and  ap- 
peal dismissed  February  5th,  1857;  containing  8,949.06  acres. 

.^  125,  410,  N.  D.,  422.  Robert  Walkinshaw,  claimant  for  Posolomi,  including  El 
Posito  de  las  Animas,  3,042  acres,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  Eebruary 
15th,  1844,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  and  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Lope  liiigo  ; 
claim  filed  March  23d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  November  20th, 
1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  16th,  1857  ;  containing  3,391.90  acres. 

126,  45,  N.  D.,  262.     Cayetano  Juares,  claimant  for  Tulucay,  2  square  leagues, 

in  Napa  county,  granted  October  26th,  1841,  by  Manuel  Jimeno  to  C. 
Juares;  claim  filed  March  23d,  1852,  coiilirmed  by  the  Commission  April 
11th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  February  25th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed 
February  23d,  1857  ;  containing  8,865.33  acres.     Patented. 

127,  87,  N.  D.,  344.     Joseph  Swanson,  Administrator  of  the  Estate  of  William 

Welch,  claimant  for  Las  Juntas,  3  square  leagues,  in  Contra  Costa  county, 
granted  February  9th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  William  Welch; 
claim  filed  March  23d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December  20th, 
1853,  and  appeal  dismissed  November  3d,  1857  ;  containing  13,324.29  acres. 

.  128,  144,  N.  D.,  80.     Jose  Maria  Amador,  claimant  for  San  Ramon,  4  square 

leagues  and  1,800  varas,  in  Alameda  county,  granted  August  17th,  1835, 
by  Jos6  Figueroa  to  J.  M.  Amador ;  claim  filed  March  23d,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  August  1st,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  14th, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  10th,  1857  ;  containing  16,516.95  acres. 

129,  358,  N.  D.     Thomas  O.  Larkin,  claimant  for  Flugge  Ranch  or  Boga,  5  square 

leagues,  in  Butte  and  Sutter  counties,  granted  February  21st,  1844,  by  Man- 
uel Micheltorena  to  Charles  William  Flugge ;  claim  filed  March  24th,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  July  17th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  Febru- 
ary 9th,  1857;  containing  22,150.71  acres. 

130,  115,  N.  D.,  417.     Francis  Larkin  et  al.,  claimants  for  Larkin's  Rancho,  10 

square  leagues,  in  Colusi  coimty,  granted  December  15th,  1844,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  F.  Larkin  et  al. ;  claim  filed  March  24th,  1852,"  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  April  25th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  14th, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  10th,  1857  ;  containing  44,364.22  acres. 
Patented. 


131,  '23,  N.  D.,  413.  Thomas  O.  Larkin  et  al,  claimants  for  Jimpno  Rancho,  11 
square  leagues,  in  Colusi  and  Yuba  counties,  granted  November  4th,  1844, 
by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Manuel  Jimeno  ;  claim  filed  March  24th,  1852,      __ 


APPENDIX.  19 

confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  10th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court 
July  5th,  1855,  and  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  in  18  Howard,  557 ;  con- 
taining 48,854.26  acres. 

132, 105,  S.  T>.,  291 .  Vicente  Sanchez  et  al,  heirs  of  Jos6  Maria  Sanchez,  claimants 
for  Lomerias  Muertas,  H  square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted 
August  16th,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Jos6  Antonio  Castro;  claim 
filed  Marcli  30tli,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  March  14th,  1854,  by 
the  District  Court  February  1st,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24tli, 
1857  ;  containing  6,651.91  acres. 

^  133,  106,  S.  D.,  49.  Jose  Maria  Sanchez,  claimant  for  Llano  del  Tcquisquita, 
one-half  square  league,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  October  12th,  1835,  by 
Jose  Castro  to  J.  M.  Sanchez ;  claim  filed  March  30th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  March  14th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  1st, 
1856,  and   appeal   dismissed  February  24th,   1857  ;    containing    16,016.30 


i  -^  134,  92,  N.  D.  M.  G.  Vallejo,  claimant  for  lot  150  by  130  varas,  in  Sonoma  city, 
granted  July  5th,  1835,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  M.  G.  Vallejo;  claim  filed 
March  30th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  l7th,  1854,  by  the 
District  Court  February  18th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  23d, 
1857  ;  containing  3.81  acres. 

^  135,  107,  S.  D.,  139.  Jose  de  la  Guerra  y  Noriega,  claimant  for  Conejo,  described 
by  boundaries,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  October  12th,  1822,  by 
Pablo  V.  de  Sola  to  Jos6  de  la  G.  y  Noriega ;  claim  filed  March  30th,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  March  14th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  Feb- 
ruary 16th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  21st,  1859;  containing 
48,671.56  acres. 


^  136,  41,  N.  D.,  172.  Jasper  O'Farrell,  claimant  for  Estero  Americano,  2  square 
leagues,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  September  4th,  1839,  by  Manuel  Ji- 
meno  to  Ed.  Manuel  Mcintosh;  claim  filed  March  SolBi,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  April  11th,  1853,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  2d, 
1857  ;  containing  8,849.13  acres.     Patented. 

.*-»  137,  26,  S.  D.,  251.  Guadalupe  Cantua,  claimant  for  San  Luisito,  described  by 
boundaries,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  August  6th,  1841,  by  Juan 
B.  Aivarado  to  G.  Cantua ;  claim  filed  March  30th,  1852,  confirmed  by  tlie 
Commission  October  25th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  September  25th, 
1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  5th,  1856  ;  containing  4,389.13  acres. 
Patented. 


138,  7,  S.  D.    John  B.  R.  Cooper,  claimant  for  Bolsas  del  Potrero  y  Moro  Cojo 
or  La  Sagrada  Familia,  2  square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  June 


L 


20  APPENDIX. 

22d,  1822,  by  P.  Y.  de  Sola  to  Jose  Joaquin  de  la  Torre ;  claim  filed  March 
30th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  February  21st,  1853,  by  the  Dis- 
trict Court  January  10th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  5th,  1857; 
containing  6,915.77  acres.     Patented. 

i^'  —  139,  168,  S.  D.,  142.     Fernando  Tico,  claimant  for  Ojay,  described  by  boundaries, 

in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  April  6th,  18*37,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
F.  Tico  ;  claim  filed  March  30th,  1 852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  May 
16th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  October  2d,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed 
February  5th,  1857  ;  containing  17,792.70  acres. 

^  3.      140,  73,  S.  D.,  218.     Julian  Estrada,  claimant  for  Santa  Rosa,  3  square  leagues,  in 

San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  June  18th,  18'41,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
J.  Estrada;  claim  filed  March  30th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
January  17th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  September  26th,  1855,  and  appeal 
dismissed  February  5th,  1857  ;  containing  13,183.62  acres. 


'— •  141,  37,  N.  D.  Jose  Maria  Alviso,  claimant  for  Milpitas,  1  square  league,  in 
Santa  Clara  county,  granted  September  23d,  183^,  by  Jose  Castro  to  J.  M. 
Alviso  ;  claim  filed  March  30th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  March 
14th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  March  3d,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  De- 
cember 5th,  1856  ;  containing  4,807  acres. 

142,  237,  N.  D.     Eobert  S.  Eaton,  claimant  for  part  of  Canada  de   Guadalupe 

Visitacion  y  Rodeo  Viejo,  700  acres  of  2  square  leagues,  in  San  Francisco 
and  San  Mateo  counties,  (No.  745J)  granted  July  31st,  1841,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  Jacob  P.  Leese;  claim  filed  March  30th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  December  19th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  October  18th, 
1858,  and  appeal  dismissed  October  18th,  1858  ;  containing  766.35  acres.       — » 

143,  38,  N.  D.,  392.    John  Bidwell,  claimant  for  Arroyo  Chico,  described  by  bounda- 

ries, in  Butte  county,  granted  November  18th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Miclieltorcna 
to  William  Dickey ;  claim  filed  March  30th,  185i2,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion March  14th,  1853,  by  the  District   Court  July  16th,  1855,  and  by  the       ^^ 
U.  S.  Supreme  Court;  containing  22,214.47  acres.    Patented. 

144,  28,  N.  D.,  473.     Charles  D.  Semple,  claimant  for  Rancho  de  Coins,  2  square  <'"  \ 
I  leagues,  in  Colusi  county,  granted  October  4th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  John    " 

Bidwell;  claim  filed  March  31st,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  Octo- 
ber 25th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  July  5th,  1855,  and  by  the        - — 
IT.  S.  Supreme  Court;  containing  8,876.02  acres. 

145,  5,  S.  D.,  70.  88.     Concepcion  Munras  et  al.,  heirs  of  Stephen  Munras,  claim- 

ants for  San  Yincente,  2  square  leagues,  in"^  Monterey  county,  granted  De- 
cember 16th,  1835,  by  Jos6  Castro,  September  20th,  1836,  by  Nicolas 
Gutierrez,  and  2-J  square  leagues  November  11th,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alva-    — 


APPENDIX.  21 

rado,  to  Francisco  Soto  and  Stephen  Munras  ;  claim  filed  April  1st,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  February  Utli,  1853,  by  the  District  Co\irt 
February  20th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1859  ;  containing;- 
19,979.01  acres. 

146,  53,  N.  D.,  403,  Samuel  Norris,  claimant  for  Eancho  del  Paso,  10  square 
leagues,  in  Sacramento  and  Placer  counties,  granted  December  20th,  1844, 
by  Manuel  Michcltorena  to  Eliab  Grimes;  claim  filed  April  1st,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  April  18th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  Angust 
13th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  December  22d,  1856  ;  containing  44,371.42 


l^  -^  147,  301,  N.  D.  Charles  Covillaud  et  al.,  Administrators  of  the  Estate  of  John 
Thompson  et  al.,  claimants  for  Honcut,  7  square  leagues,  in  Yuba  county, 
granted  December  22d,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  and  J.  A.  Sutter  to 
Teodoro  Cordua ;  claim  filed  April  1st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
March  27th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  February  23d,  1857,  and  appeal 
dismissed  August  21st,  1857  ;  containing  31,069.33  acres, 

V  ^.  148,  228,  N.  D.     Antonia  Higuera  ct  al.,  heirs  of  Jose  Hignera,  claimants  for  Los     X 
Tularcitos,  described  by  boundaries,  in  Santa  Clara  and  Alameda  counties, 
,'      granted  October  Ith,  1821,  by  P.  Y,  de  Sola  to  Jose  Higuera;  claim  filed 
y     April  1st,   1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  November  28th,  1854,  and 
appeal  dismissed  December  12th,  1856;  containing  4,394,35  acres. 


i 


149,  203,  N,  D,     Antonia  Higuera  et  al.,  claimants  for  Llano  del  Abrevadero,  de- 

scribed by  boundaries,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  January  1st,  1822, 
'-J      by  P,  V,  de  Sola  to  Jose  Higuera;  claim  filed  April  1st,  1852,  rejected  b}^ 
the  Commission  December  19th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of 
prosecution  April  21st,  1856. 

150,  25,  N.  D.,  418.     Guillermo   Chard,  claimant  for  Rancho  de  las  Flores,  3 

square  leagues,  in  Tehama  county,  granted  December  24th,  1844,  by  Man- 
uel Micheltorena  to  G.  Chard ;  claim  filed  April  2d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  February  7th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  July  16th,  1855,  and 
appeal  dismissed  January  13th,  1857;  containing  13,315.58  acres.  Pat- 
ented. 


151,  108,  S.  D.,  169.  Mariano  Malarin,  Executor  of  the  Estate  of  Juan  Malarin, 
claimant  for  Zanjones,  1-^-  s('uare  lec^^^^ues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  Au- 
gust 20tli,  1M,9^  by  Manuel  Jimeno  to  Gabriel  de  la  Torre ;  claim  filed 
April  2d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  February  2lst,  1854,  by  the 
District  Court  January  1 1th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  5th,  1857  :  — ~* 
containing  6,714.49  acres. 

•       152,  109,  S.  D.,  21.     Mariano  Malarin,  Executor  of  the  Estate  of  Juan  Malarin,       . 


22  APPENDIX. 

claimant  for  Guadalupe  Llanito  de  los  Correos,  2  square  leagues,  in  Mon- 
terey county,  granted  May  22d,  1^833,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Juan  Malarin ; 
claim  filed  April  2d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  February  21st, 
1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  11th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  Feb-       -   -- 
ruary  5th,  1857;  contahiing  8,858.44  acres. 

153,  204,  S.  D.  Mariano  Malarin,  attorney  for  Jose  Santiago  Estrada  and  broth- 
ers, claimants  for  Buenavista,  2  square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted 
May  28th,  1822,  hj%.  A.  Arguello  to  Jose  Santiago  Estrada  and  brothers ; 
claim  filed  April  2d,  18.52,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  September  26th, 
1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  14th,  1857;  containing  7,725.56  acres.    >•"-—- 

154, 110,  S.D.,46,  176.  Mariano  Malarin,  Executor  of  the  Estate  of  Juan  Malarin, 
claimant  for  Chualar,  2  square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  Sep- 
tember 7th,  1839,  by  Manuel  Jimcno  to  Juan  Malarin ;  claim  filed  April 
2d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  .Commission  February  21st,  1854,  by  the  Dis- 
trict Court  January  11th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  5th,  1857;  .*»^ 
containing  8.889.68  acres. 

155,  16,  S.  D.,  77.     Catalina  Manzaneli  de  Munras,  claimant  for  Laguna  Seca!,  1 

league  by  1^,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  June  22d,  1834,  by  Jose  Figue- 
roa to  C.  M.  de  Munras  ;  claim  filed  April  2d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com-  j 

mission  April  11th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  February  20th,  1856,  and      . , 

appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857  ;  containing  2,179.50  acres. 

156,  56,  N.  D.,  421.     William  H.  McKee,  claimant  for  Jacinto,  8  square  leagues, 

in  Colusi  county,  granted  September  2d,  \844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to 

Jacinto  Rodriguez;  claim  filed  April  2d,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission 

October  18th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  January  15th,  1857, 

and  appeal  dismissed  August  5th,  1857;  containing  35,487.52  acres.     Pat-         ""^^ 

ented. 

*^ 

157,  42,  N.  D.,  412.     Josefa  Soto,  claimant  for  Capay,  10  square  leagues,  in  Colusi 

and  Tehama  counties,  granted  December  21st,  1844,  by  Manuel  Michelto- 
rena to  Josefa  Soto ;  claim  filed  April  5tli,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion April  11th,  1853,  by  the  Disti-ict  Court  July  16th,  1855,  and  appeal 
dismissed  November  25th,  1855  ;  containing  44,388.17  acres.     Patented. 


— •  158,  351,  N.  D.  Alpheus  Basilio  Thompson,  claimant  for  8  square  leagues,  in  San 
Joaquin  and  Stanislaus  counties,  granted  June  1st,  1846^  by  Pio  Pico  to  A. 
B.  Thompson;  claim  filed  April  5th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
June  19th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  September  12tli,  1856,  and  appeal 
dismissed  December  24th,  1856;  containing  35,532.80  acres.     Patented. 


159,  51,  N.  D.     Henrique  Huber,  claimant  for  Honcut,  8  square  leagues,  in  Butte 

county,  granted  February  11th,  1845,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  E.  Huber; 


APPENDIX.  23 

claim  filed  April  5tli,  1852,  and  rejected  by  the  Commission  October  12th, 
1853. 


4  160,  3-4,  N.  I).,  310.  George  C.  Yonnt,  claimant  for  La  Jota,  1  square  league,  in 
Napa  county,  granted  October  23d,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  G.  C 
Yount ;  claim  filed  April  5th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  October 
21st,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  July  6th,  1854,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed April  2d,  1857  ;  containing  4,453.84  acres.     Patented. 

i  —  161,  136,  N.  D.  Jose  Maria  Sanchez,  claimant  for  Las  Animas  or  Sitio  de  la 
Brea,  in  Santa  Cla^a  county,  granted  August  17th,  1802,  by  Marquinas  to 
Mai-iano  Castro,  and  August  7th,  1835,  by  Jose  Eigueroa  to  Josefa  Romero, 
widow  of  M.  Castro;  claim  filed  April  5th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission February  14th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  May  l7th,  1856,  and 
appeal  dismissed  January  26th,  1857  ;  containing  24,066.24  acres. 

—  162,  75,  S.  D.,  273.  Francisco  Branch,  claimant  for  Arroyo  Grande  or  San  Ramon, 
described  by  boundaries,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  April  25th, 
1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Zeferino  Carlon ;  claim  filed  April  6th,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  17th,  1854,  by.  the  District  Court 
October  20th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857  ;  containing 
4,437.58  acres. 


—    163,  59,  S.  D.,  152.     Teodoro  Arellanos,  claimant  for  El  Rincon,  1  square  league, 
^     in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  June  22d,  1835,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  T. 
Arellanes  ;  claim  filed  April  6th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  Novem- 
ber 22d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  October  18th,  1855,  and  ap- 
peal dismissed  February  24th,  1857;  containing  4,459.63  acres. 

---  164,  49,  N.  D.,  180.  Josefa  Haro  de  Guerrero  et  al.,  heirs  of  Francisco  Guerrero 
Palomares,  claimants  for  El  Corral  de  Tierra,  1  square  league,  in  San  Fran- 
cisco county,  granted  October  16th,  1839,  by  Manuel  Jimeno,  and  May  1st, 
1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena,  to  F.  G.  Palomares  ;  claim  filed  April  6th, 
1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  18th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court 
March  24th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  December  24th,  1856;  containing 
7,766.35  acres. 


165,  50,  N.  D.,  246,  430.  Jacob  P.  Leese,  claimant  for  Huichicha,  2  square  leagues, 
in  Sonoma  county,  granted  October  26th,  1841,  by  Manuel  Jimeno,  and 
July  6th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena,  to  J.  P.  Leese  ;  claim  filed  April 
6th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  18th,  1853,  by  the  District 
Court  April  22d,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  December  24th,  1856  ;  contain- 
ing 18,704.04  acres.     Patented. 


166,  47,  N.  D.,  225.     Marico  Ygnacio  del  Bale  et  al,  widow  and  heirs  of  Ed.  A. 
Bale,  kclaimants  for  Carne  Humana,  4  square  leagues,  in  Napa  county, 


^ 


24  APPENDIX. 

granted  March  14th,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Edouardo  A.  Bale; 
claim  filed  April  6th, "1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  18th,  1853, 
by  the  District  Court  March  24th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  December 
24th,  1856. 


^'  167,  289,  N.  i).,  210,  354.  Antonio  Sufiole^aZ.,  claimants  for  part  of  Los  Coches, 
one-half  square  league,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  March  12th,  1844, 
by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Eoberto  ;  claim  filed  April  6th,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  March  20th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  April  1st, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  December  24th,  1856  ;  containing  2,219.34  acres. 
Patented. 


168,  46,  N.  D.,  36.  Heirs  of  Juan  Sanchez  de  Pacheco,  claimants  for  Arroyo  de 
las  Nueces  y  Bolbones,  2  square  leagues,  in  Contra  Costa  county,  granted 
July  11th,  1834,  by  Jose  Pigueroa  to  J.  S.  de  Pacheco ;  claim  filed  April 
6th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  11th,  1853,  by  the  District 
Court  December  22d,  1856,  decision  of  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  as  to  the 
right  of  appeal  in  20  Ploward,  261,  and  decree  of  the  District  Court  affirmed 
by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  in  22  Howard,  225;  containing  17,734.52 
acres. 


169,  111,  S.  D.  James  Stokes,  claimant  for  Eancho  de  las  Vergeles,  formerly 
called  Eancho  de  la  Canada  de  Enmedio  and  Canada  de  Cebada,  2  square 
leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  August  28th,  1835,  by  Jos6  Pigueroa, 
and  September  4th,  1835,  by  Jose  Castro,  to  Jose  Joaquin  Gomez;  claim 
filed  April  7th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  Pebruary  21st,  1854,  con- 
firmed by  the  District  Court  September  28th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed 
Pebruary  24th,  1857;  containing  8,759.82  acres. 


170,  359,  S.  D.,  15.  Henry  D.  McCobb,  claimant  for  Corral  de  Tierra,  described 
by  boundaries,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  April  15th,  1836,  by  Nicolas 
Gutierrez  to  Guadalupe  Pigueroa;  claim  filed  April  7th,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  July  3d,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  June  17th, 
1859. 


171,  200,  N.  D.  John  Prederick  Schultess,  claimant  for  37  50-vara  lots,  Mission 
Dolores,  in  San  Prancisco  county,  granted  Pebruary  10th,  1,846,  by  Pio 
Pico  to  Prudencio  Santillan;  claim  filed  April  8th,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  December  19th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  pros- 
ecution April  21st,  1856. 


.72,  201,  N.  D.  John  Prederick  Schultess  et  al.,  claimants  for  47  50-vara  lots, 
Mission  Dolores,  in  San  Prancisco  county;  claim  filed  April  8th,  1852,  re- 
jected by  the  Commission  December  19th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  for 
failure  of  prosecution  April  21st,  1856.  ^ 


APPENDIX.  25 

1 73, 182,  N.  D.,  328,  423.  Catlicrinc  Sheldon,  Administratrix,  and  Gabriel  W.  Gunn, 
Administrator  of  the  Estate  of  .Tared  Sheldon,  claimant  for  Omochumnc, 
5  sqnare  Icagncs,  in  Sacramento  county,  gi-anted  January  8th,  1844,  by 
Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Joaquin  Sheldon;  claim  filed  April  10th,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  October  10th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court 
December  3d,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  August  6th,  1857. 

174,  175,  S.  D.,  367.  Jos6  Amesti,  claimant  for  Los  Corralitos,  4  square  leagues, 
in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  April  1st,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to 
Jose  Amesti ;  claim  filed  Ajjril  13th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
May  2d,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  28th,  1857  ;  containing 
15,440.02  acres.     Patented. 


p^'  175,  347,  S.  D.  Santiago  Arguello,  claimant  for  Mission  San  Diego,  in  San 
Diego  county,  granted  June  8th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  ;  claim  filed  April  13th, 
1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  June  26th,  1855,  and  by  the  District 
Court  June,  1858. 


K'  — -176,  340,  S.  D.,  187.  Andres  Castillero,  claimant  for  Island  of  Santa  Cruz,  de- 
scribed by  boundaries,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  grantedTMay  22d,  \^839,i  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Andres  Castillero;  claim  filed  Aj^ril  13th,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  July  3d,  1 855,  by  the  District  Court  January 
14th,  1857,  and  decree  affirmed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  in  23  How- 
ard, 464. 


^  V  177,  72,  S.  D.,  406,  Jose  Mariano  Bonilla,  claimant  for  100  varas  by  50,  in  San 
Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  September  30tli,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena 
to  J.  M.  Bonilla;  claim  filed  April  13th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion January  24th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  September  27tli,  1855,  and 
appeal  dismissed  February  5tli,  1857. 


178,  61,  S.  D.,  481.  Joaquin  Carrillo  and  Jose  Antonio  Carrillo,  claimants  for 
Mission  Vieja  de  la  Purisima,  1  square  league,  in  Santa  Barbara  county, 
granted  November  20th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico;  claim  filed  April  13th,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  November  15th,  1853,  and  appeal  dismissed 
June  8th,  1857  ;  containing  4,443.43  acres. 


179,  73,  N.  D.     E,afaela  Soto  de  Pacheco  et  al,,  claimants  for  San  Ramon,  2 

square  leagues,  in  Contra  Costa  county,  granted  June  10th,  1833,  by  Jose 
Figueroa ;  claim  filed  April  13th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  Novem- 
ber 22d,  1853,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  February  8th,  1858. 

# 

180,  382,  N.  D.,  511.     Jasper  O'Farrcll,  claimant  for  Canada  de  Capay,  9  square 

leagues,  in  Yolo  county,  granted  May  2d,  184  6^  by  Pio  Pico  to  Santiago 
Nemesis  and  Francisco  Berreyesa;  claim  filed  April  13th,  1852,  confirmed 


26  APPENDIX. 

by  the  Commission  August  14th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  March  2d, 
1857,  and  ajipeal  dismissed  April  2d,  1857;  containing  40,078.58  acres. 

181,  324,  N.  D.,  416.  Hiram  Grimes,  claimant  for  San  Juan,  -i^  square  leagues, 
in  Placer  and  Sacramento  counties,  granted  December  24tli,  1844,  by  Man- 
uel Micheltorena  to  Joel  P.  Dedmond;  claim  filed  April  IStli,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  May  8th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  June  3d, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  August  11th,  1857  ;  containing  19,982.70  acres. 
Patented. 


182,  367,  N.  D.  Peter  Lassen,  claimant  for  Bosquejo,  5  square  leagues,  in  Te- 
liama  county,  granted  December  26th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  P. 
Lassen;  claim  filed  April  14th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  July 
24th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857,  and  apjDcal  dismissed  July 
29th,  1857  ;  containino-  16,208.65  acres. 


183,  179,  N.  D.     Samuel  Neal,  claimant  for  Esquon,  5  square  leagues,  in  Butte 

county,  granted  December  22d,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  and  J.  A. 
Sutter  to  S.  Neal ;  claim  filed  April  16th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
January  23d,  1 855,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857,  and  ap- 
peal dismissed  July  30th,  1857  ;  containing  22,193.78  acres.     Patented. 

184,  295,  N.  D.,  31.     Martina  Castro,  claimant  for  "Shoquel,  3  miles  by  one-half 

league,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  November  23d,  1833,  by  Jose  Figue- 
roa  to  M.  Castro;  claim  filed  April  16th,  1852,  confirnied  by  the  Commis- 
sion June  23d,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  22d,  1857;  containing 
1,668.03  acres.     Patented. 

185,  371,  N.  D.,  415.     William  B.  Ide,  claimant  for  Baranca  Colorada,  4  square 

leagues,  in  Tehama  county,  granted  December  4th,  1 844,  by  Manuel  Michel- 
torena to  Josiah  Belden;  claim  filed  April  19th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  July  24th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  13th,  1857  ; 
containing  17,707.49  acres.     Patented. 

186,  40,  S.  D.,  302.     Joaquin  de  la  Torre,  claimant  for  Arroyo  Seco,  4  square 

leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  December  30th,  1840,  by  Juan  B.  Al- 
varado  to  J.  de  la  Torre ;  claim  filed  April  20th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission IsTovember  22d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  March  3d, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  9th,  1857;  containing  16,523.35  acres. 
Patented. 

187,  289,  S.  D.     Sebastian  Eodriguez,  claimant  for  Bolsa  del  Pajaro,  2  square 

leagues,  in  Santa  Cruz  coq||ty,  granted  September  30th,  ljj3.7,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  S.  Rodriguez  ;  claim  filed  April  20th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  March  27th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  21st,  1857  ; 
containing  5,496.51  acres.     Patented. 


APPENDIX.  27 

i^  188,  257,  S.  D.,  554.  Frederick  Billings  et  al.,  Assignees  of  Bezer  Simmons, 
claimants  for  an  Island,  ^  square  leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted 
May  15th,  1846,  by  Pio  Tico  to  Pedro  C.  Carrillo  ;  claim  filed  April  20th, 
1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  October  31st,  1853,  and  confirmed  by  the 
District  Court  January  9th,  1857. 

-  -—  189,  49,  S.  D.,  479.  Maria  Antonia  de  la  Guerra  y  Lataillade,  claimant  for  Cor- 
ral de  Cuati,  3  scpiare  leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  Novem- 
ber 14th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Agustin  Davila ;  claim  filed  April  20th,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  November  22d,  1853,  by  the  District  Court 
September  16th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  5th,  1857;  contain- 
ing 13,300.24  acres. 

—  190,  45,  S.  D.,  237.  Jos6  Maria  Villaviccncia,  claimant  for  Corral  de  Piedra,  2 
square  leagues,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  May  14th,  1841,  by  Jvian 
B.  Alvarado,  with  an  extension  of  5,  granted  May  28th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico,  to 
J.  M.  Villaviccncia;  claim  filed  April  20th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission November  15th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  December  3d,  1855, 
and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857  ;  containing  30,911.20  acres. 

191,  112,  S.  D.,  7.  Charles  Walters,  claimant  for  El  Toro,  W  square  leagues, 
in  Monterey  county,  granted  Api'il  17th,  1835,  to  Jose  Ramon  Estrada; 
claim  filed  April  20th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December  22d, 
1852,  by  the  District  Court  October  5th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  Febru- 
ary 24th,  1857  ;  containing  5,668.41  acres. 

—  192,  229,  N.  D.,  202.  Sebastian  Rodriguez,  claimant  for  Rincon  de  la  Ballena, 
1  square  league,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  April  15th,  1839^  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado  to  Jx)se  Cornelio  Bernar;  claim  filed  April  20tli,  1852,  and  re- 
jected by  the  Commission  November  14th,  1854. 

-^  193,  227,  N.  D.,  264.  John  B.  R.  Cooper,  claimant  for  El  Molino  or  Rio  Ayoska, 
10-^  square  leagues,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  December  31st,  1833,  by 
Jose  Figueroa,  and  February  24th,  1836,  by  Nicolas  Gutierrez,  to  JTb'.  R. 
Cooper;  claim  filed  April  20th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  No- 
vember 14t]i,  1854,  by  the  District  Court.  March  24th,  1856,  and  appeal  dis- 
*"     missed  December  15th,  1856;  containing-  17,892.42  acres.     Patented. 

194,  39,  N.  D.,  226.     Salvador  Vallejo,  claimant  for  Llajome,  1^  square  leagues, 

in  Napa  county,  granted  March  16Lh,  1841_,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
Tomaso  A.  Rodriguez  ;  claim  filed  April  20th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  February  21st,  1853,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  9th,  1857  ; 
containing  6,652.58  acres. 

195,  3,  S.  D.,  95.     Josefa  Antonia  Gomez  de  Walters  et  al.,  widow  and  heirs  of 

Rafael  Gomez,  claimants  for  Los  Tularcitos,  6  square  leagues,  in  Monterey 


28  APPENDIX.. 

county,  granted  December  IStli,  1834,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Rafael  Gomez  ; 
claim  filed  April  20th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December  22d, 
1852,  by  the  District  Court  September  24th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed 
February  5th,  1857  ;  containing  26,581.34  acres. 

^  "^  196,  302,  N.  D.     Charles  Chana,  claimant  for  Nemshas,  4  square  leagues,  granted 

July  26th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Teodoro  Sicard;  claim  filed 
April  22st,  1852,  confirmed  by  tlie  Commission  January  23d,  1855,  by  the 
District  Court  October  16th,  1856,  judgment  of  District  Court  reversed  by 
the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  and  petition  dismissed  in  24  Howard,  151. 

197,  74,  N.  D.,  400.  Jose  B,  Cliiles,  claimant  for  Catacula,  2  square  leagues,  in 
Napa  county,  granted  November  4th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  J. 
B.  Chiles;  claim  filed  April  21st,  1852,' confirmed  by  the  Commission  No- 
vember 4th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  August  13th,  1855,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed April  2d,  1857  ;  containing  8,545.72  acres. 

I  198,  40,  N.  D.,  207.     Ygnacio  Pachcco,  claimant  for  San  Jose,  1^  square  leagues, 

in  Marin  county,  granted  October  3d,  1840,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Y. 
Pacheco  ;  claim  filed  April  23d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April 
11th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  March  24th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed 
July  31st,  1857;  containing  6.659.25  acres.     Patented. 

J  -—  199,  15,  N.  D.,  507.     Charles  Mayer  et  ah,  claimants  for  German,  5  square  leagues, 

in  Mendocino  county,  granted  April  8th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Ernest  Rufus  ; 
claim  filed  April  27th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December  22d, 
1852,  by  the  District  Court  September  10th,  1855,  and  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme 
Court;  containing  17,580.01  acres. 

^^^  200,  81,  N.  D.,  230.  Teodoro  Robles  and  Secundino  Robles,  claimants  for  Rincon 
de  San  Prancisquito,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  grp,nted  March  29th,  1841,  by 
Juan  B.  Al-^iirado  to  JosePeua;  claim  filed  April  27th,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  November  29th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  October 
29th,  1855,  and  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court. 


201,  33,  N.  D.     Samuel  J.  Hensley,  claimant  for  Aguas  Nieves,  6  square  leagues, 

in  Butte  county,  granted  December  22d,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to 
Samuel  J.  Hensley;  claim  filed  April  27th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission February  14th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  July  5th,  1855,  decision 
of  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  as  to  the  right  of  appeal  in  20  Howard,  261. 

202,  43,  N.  D.,  549.     William  Gordon  and  Nathan  Coombs,  claimants  for  Chim- 

iles,  4  square  leagues,  in  Napa  county,  granted  May  2d,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico 
to  Jos6  Ygnacio  Berrcyesa  ;  claim  filed  April  28th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  April  11th,  1853,  and  appeal  dismissed  July  27th,  1857;  con- 
taining 17,762.44  acres.     Patented. 


APPENDIX.  29 

— ^  203,  26,  N.  D.  William  Gordon,  claimant  for  Qncscsosi  or  Guescsosi,  2  square 
leagues,  in  Yolo  county,  granted  January  27tli,  1843,  by  Manuel  Michelto- 
rcna  to  AVilliam  Gordon;  claim  filed  April  28tli,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  January  10th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857,  and 
appeal  dismissed  June  2d,  1857;  containing  8,894.49  acres.     Patented. 


204,  308,  N.  D.  Teodora  Soto,  claimant  for  Canada  del  Hambre  and  Las  Bolsas 
del  Hambre,  2  square  leagues,  in  Contra  Costa  county,  granted  May  18th, 
1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Teodora  Soto ;  claim  filed  April  29th,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  May  15th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  April 
16th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  August  11th,  1857;  containing  13,312.70 
acres. 


205,  121,  N.  D.,  571.  James  D.  Galbraith,  claimant  for  Bolsa  de  Tomalcs,  5 
square  leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  June  12th,  1845j  by  Pio  Pico  to 
Juan  N.  Padilla;  claim  filed  April  29th,  1852,  confirmed  by  Commission 
April  11th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  1st,  1854,  decree  reversed 
by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  and  cause  remanded  in  22  Howard,  87.  Con- 
firmed by  the  District  Court  February  7th,  1861. 


—  206,  336,  S.  D.,  110.  Antonia  Maria  Cota  et  al.,  heirs  of  Tomas  Olivera,  claim- 
ants for  Tenusquet,  2  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted 
April  7th,  \§>2J ,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Tomas  Olivera ;  claim  filed  April 
30th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  July  3d,  1855,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed February  21st,  1857  ;  containing  8,900.75  acres. 


^  . —  207,  246,  N.  D. ;  286,  S.  D.,  (returned  to  N.  D.  September  21st,  1855.)  Joseph 
L.  Majors,  in  behalf  of  his  wife,  Maria  de  los  Angeles  Castro,  claimant  for 
Rancho  del  Refugio,  one-third  of  Rancho,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted 
April  8th,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Maria  Candida,  Maria  Jacinta  and 
Maria  de  los  Angeles  Castro  ;  claim  filed  April  30th,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  January  15th,  1855,  and  for  failure  of  proseution  appeal  dis- 
missed December  18th,  1856. 


208,  180,  N.  D.,  233.  J.  L.  Majors,  claimant  for  San^gustin,  1  square  league, 
in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  April  21st,  1^841^  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
Juan  Jos6  Crisostomo  Mayor;  claim  filed  April  30th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  September  26th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  23d, 
1857,  and  a^^peal  dismissed  December  23d,  1857  ;  containing  4,436.78  acres. 


209,  250,  N.  D.,  324.  Ramon  Rodriguez  and  Francisco  Alviso,  claimants  for 
Agua  Puerca  and  Las  Trancas,  1  square  league,  in  Santa  Cruz  county, 
granted  November  2d,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  R.  Rodriguez  and 
F.  Alviso ;  claim  filed  April  30th,  1852,  and  rejected  by  the  Commission 
January  30th,  1855. 


30  APPENDIX. 

\^  -—  210,  255,  N.  D.  William  Bocle,  claimant  for  La  Carhonera,  one-half  square 
league,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  February  *3d,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Al- 
varado  to  William  Bocle;  claim  filed  April  30th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  January  23d,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  13th,  1857  ; 
containing  1,062.14  acres. 

*^'  ,'—  211,  113,  S.  D.  Henry  Haight,  claimant  for  Atascadero,  1  square  league,  in  San 
Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  May  6th,  J 842^  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Tri- 
fon  Garcia ;  claim  filed  May  3d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  March 
6th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  19th,  1857;  containing  4,348.23 
acres.     Patented. 

"^  212,  288,  N.  D.  Pearson  Barton  Reading,  claimant  for  part  of  Capay,  (see  No. 
157)  5  square  leagues,  in  Tehama  county,  granted  October  13th,  l^SS^by 
Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Josefa  Soto  ;  claim  filed  May  3d,  1852,  and  rejected 
by  the  Commission  March  6th,  1855.     ' 

213,  107,  N.  D.,  30.     John  Marsh,  claimant  for  Los  Mejanos,  4  leagues  by  3,  in 

Contra  Costa  county,  granted  October  13th,  1_835,  by  Jose  Castro  to  Jos6 
Noriega ;  claim  filed  May  3d,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  March  14th, 
1854,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  April  9th,  1858,  and  by  the  U.  S.  Su- 
preme Court. 

214,  275,  S.  D.,  131.     Francisco  and  Juan  BolcofF,  claimants  for  Refugio,  3  leagues 

by  2,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  April  7th,  lg,41;  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado 
to  Jose  BolcofF;  claim  filed  May  5th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
January  30th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  21st,  1857  ;  containing 
12,147.12  acres.     Patented. 


215,  37,  S.  D.,  130.  Miguel  Abila,  claimant  for  San  Miguelito,  2  square  leagues, 
in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  May  10th,  1842,  by  Juan  B,  Alvarado 
to  M.  Abila;  claim  filed  May  5th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  De- 
cember 6th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  January  25th,  1856,  and  appeal 
dismissed  February  23d,  1857. 


—  216,  38,  S.  D.,  503.  Miguel  Abila,  claimant  for  addition  to  San  Miguelito,  (see 
No.  215)  500  varas,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  March  17th,  1846, 
by  Pio  Pico  to  Miguel  Abila;  claim  filed  May  6th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  December  6tli,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  January  25th,  1856, 
and  appeal  dismissed  February  25th,  1857. 

^  217,  21,  S.  D.,  355,  478.  Octaviano  Gutierrez,  claimant  for  La  Laguna,  in  Santa 
Barbara  county,  granted  November  13th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Miguel 
Abila;  claim  filed  May  7th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  February 
21st,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  December  3d,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed 
February  23d,  1857  ;  containing  18,212.48  acres. 


APPENDIX.  31 

^  -—  218,  28,  S.  D.,  268,  317,  470,  524.  John  Wilson,  claimant  for  Canada  dc  los  Osos 
Pcclio  y  Islay,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  graiitcd  December  lst^l842,  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Victor  Linares,  April  27tli,  1843,  by  Manuel  Michcl- 
torena  to  Francisco  Vadillo,  and  September  24th,  1845,  by  Tio  Pico  to 
James  Scott  and  John  Wilson ;  claim  filed  May  7th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  April  18th,  1853,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  8th,  1859; 
containing  32,430.70  acres. 

^  —  219,  200,  S.  D.,  272.  Guillermo  Domingo  Foxon,  claimant  for  Tinaquaic,  2 
square  leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  May  6th,  1837,  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado  to  Victor  Linares;  claim  filed  May  7th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  February  7th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  October  5th, 
1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  5th,  1857  ;  containing  8,874.60  acres. 

-— -»  220,  25,  S.  D.,  474.  John  Wilson,  claimant  for  Canada  del  Chorro,  1  square 
league,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  October  10th,  1845,  by  Pio 
Pico  to  Diego  Scott  and  Juan  Wilson;  claim  filed  May  7th,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  April  18th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  October 
20th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  5th,  1857;  containing  3,166.99 
acres.     Patented. 

—  221,  184,  S.  D.,  534,  575.  Thomas  M.  Robbins  and  Manuela  Camllo  de  Jones, 
claimants  for  La  Calera  or  Las  Positas,  described  by  boundaries,  in  Santa 
Barbara  county,  granted  May  16th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Nar- 
ciso  Fabrigat,  and  one-half  square  league  additional,  July  1st,  1846,  by  Pio 
Pico  to  Thomas  M.  Robbins  ;  claim  filed  May  8th,  1 852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  April  11th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  21st,  1857; 
containing  3,281.70  acres. 


— .  222,  2,  S.  D.,  372.  John  Keyes,  claimant  for  Canada  de  Salsipuedes,  \\  square 
leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  May  18th,  1844,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  Pedro  Cordero ;  claim  filed  May  8th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  December  18th,  1852,  by  the  District  Court  October  12th, 
1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857  ;  containing  6,655.38  acres. 


223,  134.  N.  D.,  182.  Juan  Martin,  claimant  for  Corte  de  Madera  de  Novato,  2 
square  leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  October  16th,  1839^  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  J.  Martiii;  claim  filed  May  8th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission February  14th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  October  29th,  1855,  and 
appeal  dismissed  September  8th,  1857  ;  containing  8,878.82  acres. 


224,  366,  S.  D.  John  Wilson,  claimant  for  part  of  the  buildings  of  the  Mission 
San  Luis  Obispo,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  December  6th,  1845, 
by  Pio  Pico  to  Scott,  Wilson  and  McKinley ;  claim  filed  May  10th,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  July  17th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court 
June  8th,  1858. 


32  APPENDIX. 

r—  225,  231,  S.  D.  Valentin  Cota  et  al.,  claimants  for  Rio  de  Santa  Clara,  in  Santa 
Clara  county,  granted  May  22d,  1837,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Valentin 
Cota  et  al. ;  claim  filed  May  10th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  Octo- 
ber 31st,  1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  June  4tli,  1857. 


«,«-.  226,  268,  N.  D.     Michael  C.  Nye,  claimant  for  Willy,  4  square  leagues,  granted 
December  22d,  1844,  bv  Manuel  Micheltorena  and  J.  A.  Sutter  to  Michael 
•  C.  Nye;  claim  filed  May  10th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  Feb- 

ruary 8th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  JFebruary  16th,  1857,  and  rejected  by 
the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  in  21  Howard,  408. 


227,  370,  N.  D.,  396.  Andrew  Eandall  and  Samuel  Todd,  claimants  for  Aguas 
Frias,  6  square  leagues,  in  Butte  county,  granted  November  10th,  1844,  by 
Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Salvador  Oslo;  claim  filed  May  12th,  18^,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  July  l7th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  May  7th, 
1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  May  7th,  1857;  containing  26,761.40  acres. 
Patented. 


228,  362,  N.  D.,  252,  419.  Guillermo  Eduardo  Hartnell,  claimant  for  Todos 
Santos  y  San  Antonio,  5  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted 
August  28th,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado,  and  Cosumnes,  11  square  leagues, 
in  Sacramento  county,  November  3d,  1.844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena,  to  Sal- 
vador Oslo;  claim  filed  May  12th,  1852,  confirmed  for  six  leagues  on  the 
Cosumnes  river  by  the  Commission  August  7th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court 
May  14th,  1857,  and  decree  affirmed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  in  22 
Howard,  286. 


229,  131,  N.  D.  Josefa  Palomares  et  al.,  heirs  of  Francisco  Guerrero,  claimants 
for  400  varas  square,  Mission  Dolores,  in  San  Francisco  county,  granted 
November  30th,  1836;  claim,  filed  May  15th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission March  f4th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  March  24th,  1856,  and 
appeal  dismissed  April  2d,  1857  ;  containing  28.41  acres. 


230,  232,  N.  D.,  281.  William  Wolfskill,  claimant  forEio  dc  los  Putos,  4  square 
leagues,  in  Yolo  and  Solano  counties,  granted  May  24th,  1842,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  Francisco  Guerrero  ;  claim  filed  May  15th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  November  7th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  14th, 
1857;  containing  17,754.73  acres.     Patented. 


231,  102,  N.  D.,  126.  Antonio  Sunol  et  al.,  claimants  for  El  Valle  de  San  Jos6, 
described  by  boundaries,  in  Alameda  county,  granted  April  10th,  1839^  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Antonio  Maria  Pico  et  al. ;  claim  filed  May  I8t1i7l852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  31st,  1854,  by  the  District  Court 
January  14th,  1856,  and  decision  of  the  F.  S.  Supreme  Court  as  to  tlie  right 
of  appeal  in  20  Howard,  261  ;  containing  51,572.26  acres. 


APPENDIX.  33 

''  ■ —  232,  103,  N.  D.,  548.  Juan  Roland,  claimant  for  11  square  leagues,  at  the  junc- 
tion of  the  San  Joaquin  arid  Stanislaus  rivers,  granted  May  2d,  1846,  by 
Pio  Pico  to  Juan  Roland  ;  claim  filed  May  18th,  1852,  and  rejected  by  the 
Commission  January  31st,  1854. 

[^  233,  329,  N.  D.,  365.  Joshua  S.  Brackett,  claimant  for  Soulajule,  3  square  leagues, 
in  Marin  county,  granted  March  29th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to 
Ramon  Mesa;  claim  filed  May  20th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
April  17th,  1855,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  March  3d,  1856,  and  ap- 
peal dismissed  August  7th,  1857  ;  containing  2,492.19  acres. 

234,  328,  N.  D.  George  N.  Cornwell,  claimant  for  Soulajule,  \\  square  miles,  in 
Marin  county,  granted  March  29th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Ra- 
mon Mesa;  claim  filed  May  20th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April 
17th,  1855,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  February  23d,  1857,  and  appeal 
dismissed  August  7th,  1857  ;  containing  919.18  acres. 

y  ^  235,  348,  N.  D.  Emanuel  Pratt,  claimant  for  Socayac,  3  square  leagues,  granted 
December  22d,  1 844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  John  Chamberlain ;  claim 
filed  May  21st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commision  July  10th,  1855,  by  the 
District  Court  March  16th,  1857,  and  decree  reversed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme 
Court,  with  direction  to  dismiss  the  petition,  in  23  Howard,  476. 

p  .. —  236,  175,  N.  D.,  433.  Maria  Anastasia  Higuera  de  Berreyesa,  claimant  for  Las 
Putas,  8  square  leagues,  in  Solano  county,  granted  November  3d,  1843,  by 
Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Jose  de  Jesus  y  Sisto  Berreyesa ;  claim  filed  May 
21st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  September  5th,  1854,  by  the  Dis- 
trict Court  August  13th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  April  2d,  1857;  con- 
taining 35,515.82  acres. 

^  ^  237,  423,  N.  D.  Mayor  and  Common  Council  of  Sonoma,  claimants  for  Pueblo 
of  Sonoma,  4  square  leagues,  granted  June  24th,  1835,  by  M,  G.  Vallejo  to 
Pueblo  of  Sonoma ;  claim  filed  May  21st,  1852,  and  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission January  22d,  1856. 

-  238,  129,  N.  D.,  221.  Maria  Antonia  Mesa,  widow  of  Rafael  Soto,  claimant  for 
Rinconada  del  Ari-oyo  de  San  Francisquito,  one-half  square  league,  in 
Santa  Clara  county,  granted  February  16th,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
M.  A.  Mesa;  claim  filed  May  25th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
March  21st,  1854,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  November  26th,  1855, 
and  appeal  dismissed  April  16th,  1857  ;  containing  2,229.84  acres. 

"'  239,  191,  S.  D.,  391.  Jose  Joaquin  Ortega  and  Edouardo  Stokes,  claimants  for 
Santa  Ysabel,  4  square  leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  November 
9th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Jose  Joaquin  Ortega  and  Edouardo 
Stokes  ;  claim  filed  May  25th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  September 
19th,  1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  February  8th,  1858. 
C 


34  APPENDIX. 

240,  327,  S.  D.,  327.  Jos6  Antonio  Aguirrc  and  Ignacio  del  Valle,  claimants  for 
Tejon,  22  square  leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  and  Biiena  Vista  counties,  granted 
November  24tli,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  J.  A.  Aguirre  and  Ignacio 
del  Valle  ;  claim  filed  May  25th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  May 
8th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  March  15th,  1858. 

■—-241,  351,  S.  D.,  375.  Petronillo  Eios,  claimant  for  Paso  de  Eobles,  6  square 
leagues,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  May  l2th,  1844,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  Pedro  Narvaez  ;  claim  filed  May  25th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  July  3d,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  21st,  1857 ; 
containing  25,993.18  acres. 

— «  242,  57,  S.  D.,  504.  Juana  Tico  de  Rodriguez  et  ah,  heirs  of  Ramon  Rodriguez, 
claimants  for  Canada  de  San  Miguelito  and  Canada  del  Diablo,  2  square 
leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  March  21st,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to 
Ramon  Rodriguez;  claim  filed  May  26th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commis- 
sion December  13th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  January  7th, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  5th,  1856  ;  containing  8,877.04  acres. 


243,  32,  N,  D.,  154.     George  C.  Yount,  claimant  for  Caymus,  2  square  leagues,  in 

Napa  county,  granted  February  23d,  1836,  by  Nicolas  Gutierrez  to  Geo.  C 
Yount ;  claim  filed  May  26th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  February 
8th  1853,  by  the  District  Court  July  17th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  Feb- 
ruary 23d,  1857;  containing  11,886.63  acres. 

244,  211,  N.  D.     Liberata  Cesena  Bull  et  ah,  heirs  of  William  Fisher,  claimants 

for  La  Laguna  Seca,  4  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  July 
23d,  1834,  by  Jos^  Figueroa  to  Juan  Alvirez  ;  claim  filed  May  27th,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  September  26th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court 
July  17th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  14th,  1857  ;  containing 
19,972.92  acres. 


245,  331,  N.  D.     Pedro  J.  Vasquez,  claimant  for  part  of  Soulajule,   12  square 

leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  March  29th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Michelto- 
rena to  Ramon  Mesa;  claim  filed  May  27th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commis- 
sion April  17th,  1855,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  March  3d,  1856,  and 
appeal  dismissed  August  7th,  1857  ;  containing  4,473.71  acres. 

246,  352,  N.  D.     Luis  D.  Watkins,  claimant  for  part  of  Soulajule,  2f  square 

leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  March  29th,  1844^  by  Manuel  Michelto- 
rena to  Ramon  Mesa  ;  claim  filed  May  27th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commis- 
sion April  17th,  1855,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  March  3d,  1856,  and 
appeal  dismissed  August  7tli,  1857  ;  containing  919.18  acres. 

247,  334,  N.  D.     Martin  F.  Gormley,  claimant  for  part  of  Soulajule,  one-half 

square  league,  in  Marin  county,  granted  March  29th,  1844,  by  Manuel 


APPENDIX.  35 

Micheltorenn  to  Ramon  Mesa ;  claim  filed  May  27th,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  April  17th,  1855,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  March  3d, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  7th,  1857  ;  containing  2,266.25  acres. 

V^  ''=—  248,  331,  N.  D.  Charles  Covillaud,  claimant  for  New  Helvetia,  part  of  11  leagues 
first  granted,  in  Yuba  and  Sutter  counties,  granted  July  18th,  1841,  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado,  and  1845,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena,  to  John  A.  Sutter; 
claim  filed  May  31st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  May  22d,  1855, 
and  by  the  District  Court  April  10th,  1858. 

V  - —  249,  140,  N.  D.  Mariano  Guadalupe  Vallejo,  claimant  for  Yulupa,  3  square 
leagues,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  November  23d,  1844,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  Miguel  Alvarado;  claim  filed  May  31st,  1852,  rejected  by 
the  Commission  May  10th,  1854,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  January 
21st,  1857,  decree  reversed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  and  cause  remanded 
for  further  evidence,  in  22  Howard,  416. 


250,  321,  N.  D.,  306.     Mariano  Guadalupe  Vallejo,  claimant  for  Petaluma,   10 

square  leagues,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  October  22d,  1843,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  M.  G.  Vallejo,  (grant)  and  5  square  leagues,  June  22d, 
1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  M.  G.  Vallejo  (sale  by  the  Government) ; 
claim  filed  May  31st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  May  22d,  1855, 
by  the  District  Court  March  16th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  July  3d,  1857  ; 
containing  66,622.17  acres. 

251,  326,  N.  D.     Guadalupe  Vasquez  de  West  et  al.,  claimants  for  San  Miguel, 

6  square  leagues,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  November  2d,  1840,  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado,  and  October  14th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena,  to  Marcus 
West;  claim  filed  May  31st,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April  24th, 
1855,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  June  2d,  1857,  and  decree  confirmed 
by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  for  one  league  and  a  half,  in  22  Howard,  315. 


252,  58,  N.  D.,  362.     Joaquin  Carrillo,  claimant  for  Llano  de  Santa  Rosa,  3  square 

leagues,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  March  29th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Michel- 
torena to  Marcus  West;  claim  filed  May  31st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission October  21st,  1853,  by  tlie  District  Court  March  24th,  1856,  and 
appeal  dismissed  January  13th,  1857  ;  containing  13,336.55  acres. 

253,  358,  S.  D.,  579.     J.  J.  Warner,  claimant  for  Camajal  y  El  Palomar,  4  square 

leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  August,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Juan 
J.  Warner;  claim  filed  May  31st,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  July 
17th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  September  14th,  1860. 

254,  aw-,  S.  D.,  228, 407.    J.  J.  Warner,  claimant  for  Agua  Caliente  or  Valle  de  San 

Jos6,  6  square  leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  January  8th,  1 840,  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Jose  Antonio  Pico,  and  November  28th,  1844,  by 


36  APPENDIX. 

Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Juan  J.  Warner;  claim  filed  May  31st,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  October  lOth,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  Feb- 
ruary 6th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857;  containing 
26,629.88  acres. 

. —  255,  298,  N.  D.,  340.  Charles  M.  Weber,  claimant  for  Campo  de  los  Fran- 
ceses, 11  square  leagues,  in  San  Joaquin  county,  granted  June  13th,  1844, 
by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Guillermo  Gulnack  ;  claim  filed  May  31st,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  17th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  May 
1st,  1857,  and  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court;  containing  48,747.03  acres. 
Patented. 

256,  234,  N.  D,,  300.     Jose  Joaquin  Estudillo,  claimant  for  San  L^andro,  1  square 

league,  in  Alameda  county,  granted  October  16th,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alva- 
rado  to  Joaquin  Estudillo;  claim  filed  May  31st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  January  9th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  May  7th,  1857,  and 
by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court ;  containing  7,010.84  acres. 

257,  97,  N.  D.     Mariano  Castro,  claimant  for  Rancho  del  Refugio  or  Pastoria  de 

las  Borregas,  2  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  June  15th, 
1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Francisco  Estrada;  claim  filed  May  31st, 
1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  23th,  1854,  by  the  District 
Court  November  23d,  1859,  and  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court. 

258,  119,  N.  D.,  358.     Tomas  Pacheco  and  Agustin  Alviso,  claimants  for  Potrero 

de  los  Cerritos,  3  square  leagues,  in  Alameda  county,  granted  March  23d, 
1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  T.  Pacheco  and  A.  Alviso;  claim  filed 
May  31st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  February  14th,  1854,  by  the 
District  Court  October  29th,  1855,  and  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court;  con- 
taining 10,610.26  acres. 

259,  William  Reynolds  and  Daniel  Frink,  claimants  for  part  of  Nicasia,  2^ 
square  leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  August  1st,  1844,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  Pablo  de  la  Guerra  and  Juan  Cooper ;  claim  filed  June  2d, 
1852  (see  No.  270). 

—  260,  342,  N.  D.,  234.  Isaac  Graham  et  al.,  claimants  for  Zayanta,  1  league  by 
one-half,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  April  22d,  1841,  by  JuanB.  Alva- 
rado to  Juan  Jose  Crisostomo  Mayor ;  claim  filed  June  4th,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  June  26, 1855,  and  appeal  dismissed ;  containing  2,514.64 
acres. 

— -261,  360,  N.  D.,  311.  James  M.  Harbin  et  al.,  claimants  for  Rio  de  Jesus  Maria, 
6  square  leagues,  in  Yolo  county,  granted  October  23d,  1843,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  Tomas  Hardy;  claim  filed  June  8th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  June  26th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  March  23d,  1857, 
and  appeal  dismissed  May  8th,  1857;  containing  26,637.42  acres.  Pat- 
ented. 


APPENDIX.  37 

262,  114,  S.  D.,  467.  T,  W.  Sutherland,  Guardian  of  the  minor  children  of  Mig- 
uel Pedrorena,  claimants  for  El  Cajon,  11  square  leaoucs,  in  San  Diego 
county,  granted  September  23d,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Maria  Antonia  J3stu- 
dillo  de  Pedrorena;  claim  filed  June  10th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion March  14th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  September  28th,  1855,  and 
by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  in  19  Howard,  363;  containing  48,794.03 
acres. 


263,  82,  S.  D.,  495.  T.  W.  Sutherland,  Guardian  of  the  minor  children  of  Mig- 
uel Pedrorena,  claimants  for  San  Jacinto  Nuevo  and  Potrero,  in  San  Diego 
county,  granted  January  14th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Miguel  Pedrorena; 
claim  filed  June  10th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  December  27th, 
1853,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  December  24th,  1855,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed February  23d,  1857. 


264,  254,  S.  D.  W.  E.  P.  Hartnell,  claimant  for  part  of  the  Alizal,  two-thirds 
square  league,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  January  26th,  1834,  by  Jose 
Figueroa  to  Guillermo  Eduardo  Hartnell ;  claim  filed  June  10th,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  October  31  si,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  Octo- 
ber 3d,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  5th,  1857;  containing  2,971.26 
acres. 


265,  241,  S.  D.     Maria  Antonia  de  la  Guerra  y  Lataillade,  claimant  for  La  Zaca, 

in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted,  1 838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Antonio ; 
claim  filed  June  10th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  November  14th, 

1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  25th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  Feb- 
ruary 5th,  1857  ;  containing  4,480  acres. 

266,  115,  S.  D.,  409.     Agustin  Yansens,  claimant  for  Lomas  de  la  Purificacion,  3 

square  leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  December  27th,  1844,  by 
Manuel  Micheltorena  to  A.  Yansens  ;  claim  filed  June  10th,  1852,  confirnied 
by  the  Commission  November  14th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  October  3d, 

1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  5th,  1857  ;  containing  13,341.49  acres. 


267,  170,  N,  D.,  370.     Antonio  Maria  Pico  and  Henry  M.  Naglee,  claimants  for 

El  Pescadero,  8  square  leagues,  in  San  Joaquin  county,  granted  November 
28th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Antonio  Maria  Pico;  claim  filed 
June  10th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  September  19th,  1854,  con- 
firmed by  the  District  Court  September  2d,  1856,  and  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme 
Court;  containing  35,546.39  acres. 

268,  218,  N.  D.,  578.     Josefa  Carrillo  de  Fitch  et  al,  heirs  of  Henry  D.  Fitch, 

claimants  for  Paraje  del  Arroyo,  one-half  square  league,  at  Presidio 
San  Francisco,  granted  July  24th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Henry  D.  Fitch  and 
Francisco  Guerrero;  claim  filed  June  10th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commis- 
sion November  7th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  December  lOtli,  1857. 


38  APPENDIX. 

^  — '  269,  275,  N.  D.,  136.  Encarnacion  Mesa  et  al.,  claimants  for  San  Antonio,  1 
square  league,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  March  24th,  1839,  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarada  to  Prado  Mesa  ;  claim  filed  June  11th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  January  30th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  March  10th,  1856, 
and  appeal  dismissed  March  13th,  1857  ;  containing  898.41  acres. 

i  270,  392,  N.  D.,  420.     Henry  W.  Halleck  and  James  Black,  claimants  for  Nicasia, 

10  square  leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  August  18th,  1844,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  Pablo  de  la  Guerra  and  Juan  Cooper;  claim  filed  Juue 
14th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commisssion  September  25th,  1855,  by  the 
District  Court  March  9th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  April  30th,  1857  ; 
containing  56,621.04  acres. 

I  271,  333,  S.  D.     Joaquin  Gutierrez,  claimant  for  El  Potrero  de  San  Carlos,  1 

square  league,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  October  28th,  1837,  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado  to  Fructuoso  ;  claim  filed  June  14th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  June  5th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  June  8th,  1857  ;  contain- 
ing 4,306.98  acres. 

272,  116,  S.  D.,  211.     Maria  Merced  Lugo  de  Poster  et  al.,  claimants  for  San  Pas- 

cual,  3  square  leagues  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  September  24th; 
1840,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Enrique  Sepulveda  and  Jose  Perez;  claim 
filed  June  14th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  February  14th,  1854,  and 
dismissed  for  Avant  of  prosecution  March  7th,  1860. 

273,  98,  N.  D.,  345.     Antonio  Maria  Peralta,  claimant  for  part  of  San  Antonio, 

2  square  leagues,  in  Alameda  county,  granted  August  16th,  1820,  by  Pablo 
V.  de  Sola  to  Luis  Peralta;  claim  filed  June  18th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  February  7th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  4th,  1855, 
and  appeal  dismissed  October  20th,  1857;  containing  16,067.76  acres. 

274,  99,  N.  D.     Ygnacio  Peralta,  claimant  for  part  of  San  Antonio,  2  square 

leagues,  in  Alameda  county,  granted  August  16th,  1820,  by  Pablo  V.  de 
\   \^      Sola  to  Luis  Peralta;  claim  filed  June  18th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission February  7tli,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  13th,  1857,  and 
appeal  dismissed  April  20th,  1857  ;  containing  9,416.66  acres.     Patented. 

I  — -    275,  315,  S.  D.     Josefa  Morales  del  Castillo  Negrete,  claimant  for  Santa  Ana  y 

Santa  Anita,  6  square  leagues,  in  San  Joaquin  county,  granted  April  15tli, 
18,36,  by  Nicolas  Gutierrez  to  Luis  del  Castillo  Negrete ;  claim  filed  June 
24th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  March  6th,  1855,  and  for  failure 
of  prosecution  appeal  dismissed  December  I7th,  1856. 

-— :  276,  226,  N.  D.,  227.  Manuel  Alvisu,  claimant  for  Quito,  3  square  leagues,  in 
Santa  Clara  county,  granted  March  16th,  1841_i  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
Jose  Z.  Fernandez  and  Jose  Noriega;  claim  filed  June  28th,  1852,  con- 


APPENDIX.  39 

firmed  hy  the  Commission  December  5tli,'1853,  by  the  District  Court  Jan- 
uary 20th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  9th,  1857  ;  containing  13,309.85 
acres. 


-  277,  239,  N.  D.  Francisco  Ben-eyesa  et  ah,  heirs  of  G.  Berreycsa,  claimants  for 
part  of  the  Rincon  de  los  Esteros,  described  by  boundaries,  in  Santa  Clara 
county,  granted  February  10th,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Ygnacio  Al- 
visu  ;  claim  filed  June  28th,  1 852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December 
26th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  28th,  1857,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed February  18th,  1858. 


278,  204,  N,  D.,  114.  Rafael  Alvisu  et  al.,  claimants  for  part  of  the  Rincon  de 
los  Esteros,  described  by  boundaries,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  Feb- 
ruary 10th,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Ygnacio  Alvisu;  claim  filed 
June  28th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December  26th,  1854,  by 
the  District  Court  December  24th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  February 
20th,  1858;  containing  2,200.19  acres. 


279,  245,  S.  D.     Juan  Miguel  Anzar,  claimant  for  Vega  del  Jlio  del  Pajaro,  8,000 

acres,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  April  17th,  1820,  by  Pablo  V.  de  Sola 
,     to  Antonio  Maria  Castro;  claim  filed  June  28th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
i^'         Commission  December  5th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  12th, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  June  4th,  1857  ;  containing  4,310.29  acres. 

280,  427,  N.  D.     City  of  San  Francisco,  claimant  for  4  square  leagues,  granted  in 

1833  to  the  Pueblo  of  San  Francisco  ;  claim  filed  July  2d,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  October  3d,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  30th, 
1857. 


281,  207,  N.  D.     The  Executors  and  Heirs  of  Agustin  Iturbide,  claimants  for  400 

square  leagues,  granted  April  18tli,  1835,  to  Agustin  Iturbide;  claim  filed 
July  6th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  December  19th,  1854,  dis- 
missed by  the  District  Court  January  8th,  1858,  for  want  of  jurisdiction, 
and  decree  afiirmed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  in  22  Howard,  290. 

282,  221,  N.  D.,  §*0.     John  Roland  and  J.  L,  Hotusby,  claimants  for  Los  Huecos, 

9  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  May  6th,  1846,  by  Pio 
Pico  to  Luis  Arenas  and  John  Roland ;  claim  filed  July  6th,  1852,  and  re- 
jected by  the  Commission  November  7th,  1854. 


— ^  283,  90,  N.  D.,  508.  Pedro  Sainsevain,  claimant  for  La  Canada  del  Rincon,  2 
square  leagues,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  July  10th,  1843,  by  Pio  Pico 
to  Pedro  Sainsevain;  claim  filed  July  6th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission January  17th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  September  20th,  1854; 
containing  5,826.86  acres.     Patented. 


40  APPENDIX. 

284,  205,  N.  D.,  278.     Maria  Antonia  Martinez  de  Richardson  et  al.,  claimants  for 

Pinole,  4  square  leagues,  in  Contra  Costa  county,  granted  June  1st,  1842, 
byTuan  B.  Alvarado  to  Ygnacio  Martinez;  claim  filed  July  8th,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  October  24th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed 
March  10th,  1857  ;  containing  17,786.49  acres. 

285,  29,  N.  D.,  223,  309.     Guillermo   Castro,  claimant  for  part  of  San  Lorenzo, 

600  varas  square,  in  Alameda  county,  granted  February  23  d,  1J41*  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado  to  G.  Castro  ;  and  for  San  Lorenzo,  6  square  leagues,  in  Ala- 
meda county,  granted  October  24th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  G. 
Castro;  claim  filed  July  8th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  February 
14th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  July  6th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed 
January  16th,  1858;  containing  26,717.43  acres. 

286,419,  N.  D.     The  Mayor  and  Common  Council  of  San  Jose,  claimants  for 

land,  described  by  boundaries,  granted  July  22d,  1778,  by  Felipe  de  Neve  to 

■*-,;  Pueblo  of  San  Jose ;  claim  filed  July  14th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 

'•''/  mission  February  5th,  1856,  and  by  the  District  Court  November  26th,  1859. 

i 

287,  426,  N.  D.  Charles  White  and  Isaac  Brenham,  Trustees  for  C.  White  et  al., 
claimants  for  land  granted  by  Felipe  de  Neve  to  the  Mayor  and  Common 
Council  of  the  City  of  San  Jose;  claim  filed  July  14th,  1852,  and  rejected 
by  the  Commission  February  5th,  1856. 

■  288,  280,  N.  D.  Joseph  M.  Miller,  claimant  for  part  of  Llano  de  Santa  Rosa,  1 
square  league,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  March  29t*li,  1 844,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  Joaquin  Carrillo;  claim  filed  July  15th,  1852,  rejected  by 
the  Commission  March  6th,  1858,  and  appeal  dismissed  April  21st,  1856. 


289,  398,  N.  D.,  472.     Charles  J.  Brenham  et  al.,  claimants  for  Llano  Seco,  4  square 

leagues,  in  Butte  county,  granted,  provisionally,  July  26th,  1844,  by  .Manuel 
Micheltorena,  and  October  2d,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico,  to  Sebastian  Keyser ;  claim 
filed  July  17th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  September  25th,  1855, 
confirmed  by  the  District  Court  May  26th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed 
June  3d,  1859;  containing  17,767.17  acres.     Patented. 

290,  70,  S.  D.,  166.     Vicente  Cantua,  claimant  for  Rancho  Nacional,  2  square 

leagues,  in  Monterey_county,  granted  April  4th,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado 
to  Vicente  Cantua ;  claim  filed  July  I7th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion January  24th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  26th,  1855,  and  ap- 
peal dismissed  January  28th,  1857  ;  containing  6,633.19  acres. 

291,  318,  N.  D.     M.  G.  Vallejo,  claimant  for  Suscol,  in  Solano  county,  granted 

March  15th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  M.  G.  Vallejo;  claim  filed 
July  17th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  May  22d,  1855,  and  by  the 
District  Court  March  22d,  1860. 


APPENDIX.  41 

^  —  292,  238,  N.  D.  Ellen  E.  Wliitc,  claimant  for  part  of  the  Kincon  de  los  Esteros, 
2,000  acres,  in  Santa  Clara  connty,  o:rante(l  February  10th,  1838,  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado  to  Ygnacio  Alvisu ;  claim  filed  July  19th,  1852,''confirmed  by 
the  Commission  December  19th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  December 
28th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  9th,  1858;  containing  2,308.17 


— ■  293,  137,  N.  D.,  371.  Hiram  Grimes  et  al.,  claimants  for  El  Pescadero,  8  square 
leagues,  in  San  Joaquin  county,  granted  November  28th,  1843,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  Valentin  Higuera  and  Kafael  Feliz  ;  claim  filed  July  22d, 
1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  February  14th,  1854,  confirmed  by  the 
District  Court  April  11th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  December  22d,  1856  ; 
containing  35,446.06  acres.     Patented. 

—  294,  270,  N.  D.  James  Noe,  claimant  for  Island  of  Sacramento,  5  square  leagues, 
granted  March  15th,  1845,  by  Juan  B".  Alvarado  to  Roberto  Elwell;  claim 
filed  July  24th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  February  8th,  1855,  con- 
firmed by  the  District  Court  November  15th,  1856,  decree  reversed  by  the 
U.  S.  Supreme  Court,  cause  remanded  and  petition  to  be  dismissed,  in  23 
Howard,  312. 


^  „. —  295,  390,  N.  D.  Edward  A.  Breed  et  al.,  claimants  for  Mission  of  San  Rafael,  16 
square  leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted"  June  8th,  1 846,  by  Pio  Pico  to 
Antonio  Suiiol  and  Antonio  Maria  Pico  ;  claim  filed  July  26th,  1852,  and 
rejected  by  the  Commission  September  11th,  1855. 

^  296,  117,  S.  D.,  11,    'Jose  de  la  Guerra  y  Noriega,  claimant  for  Las  Posas,  6 

square  leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  May  1 5th,  1 834,  by  Jos 
Figueroa  to  Jos6  Carrillo ;  claim  filed  July  27th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  February  28th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  18th, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  21st,  1858;  containing  26,623.26  acres. 


297,  325,  S.  D.  Manuel  Larios,  claimant  for  1  square  league,  in  Monterey  connty, 
granted  May  4th,  1839,  by  Jose  Castro  to  M.  Larios;  claim  filed  August 
5th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  June  19th,  1855,  and  by  the  Dis- 
trict Court  December  23d,  1858. 

—  298,  374,  N.  D.,  312.  J.  Jesus  Pena  et  al.,  heirs  of  J.  G.  Peiia,  claimants  for 
Tzabaco,  4  square  leagues,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  October  14th,  1843, 
by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Jose  German  Pena ;  claim  filed  August  5th, 
1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  June  26th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court 
March  9th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  April  2d,  1857  ;  containing  15,439.32 
acres.     Patented. 


299,  364,  S.  D.     Nicolas  A.  Den  et  al.,  claimants  for  San  Marcos,  8  square  leagues, 
in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  June  8th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  N.  A. 


42  APPENDIX. 

Den;  claim  filed  August  11th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  July 
I7tli,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  June  8th,  1857;  containing  35,573.10 
acres. 

300,  22,  N.  T>.,  408.     Fernando  Feliz,   claimant  for  Sanel,  4  square  leagues,  in 

Mendocino  county,  granted  November  9th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena 
to  F.  Feliz;  claim  filed  August  14th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
October  18th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  January  14th,  1856, 
and  appeal  dismissed  March  20th,  1857  ;  containing  17,754.38  acres.  Pat- 
ented. 

301,  322,  N.  D.,  50.     Domingo  Peralta,  claimant  for  half  of  San  Ramon  or  Las 

Juntas,  described  by  boundaries,  in  Contra  Costa  county,  granted  in  1833, 
by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Bartolo  Paclieco  and  Mariano  Castro  ;  claim  filed  Au- 
gust 14th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  May  15th,  1855,  by  the  Dis- 
trict Court  March  2d,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  5th,  1858. 

,--'302,  43,  S.  D.,  189.     Jose  de  Jesus  Pico,  claimant  for  Piedra  Blanca,  described  by 

*^  boundaries,  in   San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  January  18th,  1840,  by 

Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Jose  de  Jesus  Pico;  claim  filed  August  14th,  1852, 

confirmed  by  the  Commission  December  13th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court 

September  25th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  4th,  1857. 

/  303,  376,  N.  D.     James  Murphy,  claimant  for  Cazadores,  4  square  leagues,  in 

Sacramento  county,  granted  December  22d,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena 
to  Ernesto  Rufus ;  claim  filed  August  14th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission July  17th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  September  22d,  1856,  decree 
reversed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  and  cause  remanded,  with  direction 
to  dismiss  the  petition,  23  Howard,  476. 

304,  260,  S.  D.,  577.  Tomas  Herrera  and  Geronimo  Quintana,  claimants  for  San 
Juan  Capistrano  del  Camote,  10  sitios  of  4,428  acres  each,  in  San  Luis 
Obispo  county,  granted  July  11th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  T.  Herrera  and  G. 
Quintana;  claim  filed  August  14th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  De- 
cember 26th,  1854,  and  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  August  8th, 
1860. 

A.  305,  44,  S.  D.     Ygnacio  Pastor,  claimant  for  Las  Milpitas,  in  Monterey  county, 

granted  May  5th,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Y.  Pastor;  claim  filed 
August  14th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December  5th,  1853,  and 
by  the  District  Court  August  28th,  1860. 

,y  ^-^  306,  395,  N.  D.,  366.  Domingo  Peralta,  claimant  for  Canada  del  Corte  de  Ma- 
dera, in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  in  1833,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  D.  Per- 
alta and  Maximo  Martinez;  claim  filed  August  14th,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  October  2d,  1855,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  April 
6th,  1858. 


APPENDIX.  43 

/^' — ^^307,  311,  N.  D.  G.  W.  P.  Bissell  and  William  H.  Aspinwall,  claimants  for  Isla 
(Ic  la  Ycgua,  or  Mare  Island,  described  by  boundaries,  in  Sonoma  county, 
granted  October  31st,  1840,  by  Manuel  Jimeno,  and  May  20tb,  1841,  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado,  to  Victor  Castro;  claim  filed  August  30tli,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  May  8tli,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  March 
2d,  1857. 

Y  308,  9,  S.  D.     Antonio  Maria  Lugo,  claimant  for  San  Antonio,  in  Los  Angeles 

county,  granted  in  1810,  by  Jos6  Dario  de  Arguello,  confirmed  by  Don 
Luis  Arguello  April  1st,  1823,  extension  granted  by  Jos6  M..Echeandia 
April  23d,  1827,  and  finally  granted  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado,  September  27th, 
1838,  to  A.  M.  Lugo;  claim  filed  August  30th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  February  21st,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  December  3d,  1855, 
and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857  ;  containing  29,514.13  acres. 

309,  212,  S.  D.  Maria  Antonia  de  la  Guerra  y  Lataillade,  claimant  for  El  Alamo 
Pintado,  1  square  league,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  August  16th, 
1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Marcelino ;  claim  filed  August  30th,  1852, 
rejected  by  the  Commission  September  26th,  1854,  and  by  the  District 
Court  June  3d,  1857. 

310,  401,  N.  D.  Juana  Briones  de  Miranda  et  al.,  heirs  of  Apolinario  Miranda, 
claimants  for  Ojo  de  Agua  de  Figueroa,  100  varas  square,  in  San  Francisco 
county,  granted  November  1 6th,  1833,  by  Jose  Sanchez  to  Apolinario  Mi- 
randa; claim  filed  August  30th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  October 
23d,  1855,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  November  25th,  1858. 

311,  188,  N.  D.  Manuel  Diaz,  claimant  for  Sacramento,  11  square  leagues,  in 
Colusi  county,  granted  May  18th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  M.  Diaz ;  claim  filed 
August  30th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  October  31st,  1854,  and  by 
the  District  Court  Marc]A5th,  1858. 

312,  36,  S.  D.,  513.  Lewis  T.  Burton,  claimant  for  Bolsa  de  Chemisal,  in  San 
Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  May  11th,  .1837,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
Francisco  Quijada;  claim  filed  August  30th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission December  5th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  December 
21st,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857;  containing  14,335 
acres. 

313,  347,  N.  D.  Juan  C.  Galindo,  claimant  for  Mission  of  Santa  Clara,  in  Santa 
Clara  county,  granted  June  10th,  1846,  by  Jose  Maria  del  Ray  (priest)  ; 
claim  filed  August  30th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  June  12th,  1855, 
and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  October  21st,  1857. 

314,  74,  S.  D.,  130.  Miguel  Abila,  claimant  for  San  Miguelito,  2  square  leagues, 
in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  April  29th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  M. 
Abila;  claim  filed  August  31st,  1852,  and  rejected  by  the  Commission  De- 
cember 13th,  1853. 


44  APPENDIX. 

•—  315,  70,  N,  D. ;  199,  S.  D.,  (sent  to  N.  D.)  298.  Maria  Antonio  Pico  etal.,  heirs 
of  Simeon  Castro,  claimants  for  Punta  del  Aiio  Nuevo,  4  square  leagues, 
in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  May  27th,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
Simeon  Castro  ;  claim  filed  August  31st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion December  13th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  December  4th,  1856,  and 
appeal  dismissed  April  2d,  1856;  containing  17,763.15  acres.     Patented. 


316,  12,  S.  D.,  283.  Jose  derCarmen  Lugo,  et  al.,  claimants  for  San  Bernardino, 
8  square  leagues,  in  San  Bernardino  county,  granted  June  21st,  1842,  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Jose  del  Carmen  Lugo,  Jose  Maria  Lugo,  Vicente 
Lugo  and  Diego  Sepulveda;  claim  filed  August  31st,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  February  2 1st,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  December  7th, 
1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  18th,   1857;    containing  35,509.41 


317,  316,  S.  D.,  528.  Jonathan  R.  Scott  and  Benjamin  Hays,  claimant  for  La 
Canada,  2  square  leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  May  12th,  1843, 
by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Ygnacio  Coronel ;  claim  filed  September  Ist, 
1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  3d,  1855,  by  the  District  Court 
February  16th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  June  4th,  1856;  containing 
5,832.10  acres. 


318,  305,  S.  D.,  71.  Jacoba  Feliz,  claimant  for  San  Francisco,  in  Santa  Barbara 
and  Los  Angeles  counties,  granted  January  22d,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado 
to  Antonio  del  Valle;  claim  filed  September  2d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  January  2d,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  June  8th,  1857  ;  con- 
taining 48,813.58  acres. 


—  319,  86,  N.  D.,  387.  John  Bidwell,  claimant  for  Los  Ulpinos,  4  square  leagues, 
in  Solano  county,  granted  November  20th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena 
to  J.  Bidwell ;  claim  filed  September  3d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion January  2d,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  October  29th,  1855,  and  ap- 
peal dismissed  March  21st,  1857  ;  containing  17,726.44  acres. 


— «  320,  331,  S.  D.  Robert  B.  Neligh,  claimant  for  6  square  leagues,  granted  April 
4th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Jose  Castro  ;  claim  filed  September  3d,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  May  8tli,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  October 
5th,  1859. 


321,  359,  N.  D.,  389.  Joseph  L.  Folsom  and  Anna  Maria  Sparks,  claimants  for 
Rio  de  los  Americanos,  8  square  leagues,  in  Sacramento  county,  granted 
October  8th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Guillermo  A.  Leidesdorff; 
claim  filed  September  4th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  June  12th, 
1855,  by  the  District  Court  February  23d,  1857,  and  further  appeal  dismissed 
April  30th,  1857;  containing  35,521.36  acres. 


APPENDIX.  45 

322,  207,  S.  D.     Maria  Antonia  dc  la  Gucrra  y  Latailladc,  claimant  for  Las  Hu- 

ertas,  1 ,300  varas  square,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  jijrantcd  July  26tli,  1 844, 
by  Manuel  Micheltorcna  to  Francisco,  Luis  and  Raymundo ;  claim  filed 
September  4th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  September  26th,  1844, 
and  by  the  District  Court  June  3d,  1857. 

323,  177,  N.  D.     Julius  Martin,  claimant  for  part  of  Entre  Napa  or  Rinconda  de 

los  Carnero,  1  mile  square,  in  Solano  county,  granted  May  9th,  1 836,  by 
Mariano  Chico  to  Nicolas  Higuera;  claim  filed  September  4th,  1852,  re- 
jected by  the  Commission  September  19th,  1854,  confirmed  by  the  District 
Court  September  7th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  May  15th,  1857;  con- 
taining 2,557.68  acres.     Patented. 


^  —  324,  83,  S.  D.  Jose  Antonio  de  la  Guerra  y  Carrillo,  claimant  for  Los  Alamos, 
in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  March  9th,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
J.  A.  de  la  Guerra  y  Carrillo;  claim  filed  September  7th,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  January  17th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  7th, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  3d,  1857  ;  containing  48,803.38  acres. 

,  325,  84,  S.  D.,  468.     George  W.  Hamley,  claimant  for  Guejito  y  Canada  de  Pa- 

lomia,  3  square  leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  September  20th, 
1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Jose  Maria  Orosio ;  claim  filed  September  7th,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  24th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court 
September  26th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  5th,  1857. 

^-_^,^-—  326,  186,  N.  D.,  363.  William  Forbes,  claimant  for  La  Laguna  de  los  Gentiles 
or  Caslamayome,  8  square  leagues,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  March  20th, 
1 844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorcna  to  Eugenio  Montenegro ;  claim  filed  Sep- 
tember 7th,  1852,  and  rejected  by  the  Commission  September  26th,  1854. 


»•  ,— r  327,  118,  S.  D.,  58.  Anastasio  Carrillo,  claimant  for  Punta  de  la  Concepcion,  in 
Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  May  10th,  1837,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
A.  Carrillo  ;  claim  filed  September  7th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
February  14th,  1854,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  October  20th,  1855 
and  appeal  dismissed  February  5th,  1857  ;  containing  24,992.04  acres. 

J  ^^  328,  20,  S.  D.,  475.  Anastasio  Carrillo,  claimant  for  Cieneguita,  400  varas 
square,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  October  10th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico 
to  A.  Carrillo;  claim  filed  September  7th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion March  14th,  1853,  and  by  the  District  Court  January  12th,  1857. 

329,  85,  S.  D.,  222.  Gil  Ybari'a,  claimant  for  Rincon  de  la  Brea,  1  square  league 
in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  February  23d,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado 
to  G.  Ybarra;  claim  filed  September  9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion December  20th,  1852,  by  the  District  Court  October  Uth,  1855,  and 
appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857  ;  containing  4,452.59  acres. 


46  APPENDIX. 

330,  226,  S.  D.     Victoria  Dominguez  et  ah,  heirs  of  Jos6  Antonio  Estudillo, 

claimants  for  Otay,  1  square  league,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  March 
24th,  1829,  by  Jose  M.  Echeandia  to  J.  A.  Estudillo;  claim  filed  Septem- 
ber 9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December  19th,  1854,  and  ap- 
peal dismissed  June  8th,  1857. 

331,  22,  S.  D.,  453.     Henry  Dalton,  claimant  for  San  Francisquito,  2  square 

leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  May  26th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  H. 
Dalton;  claim  filed  September  10th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
April  11th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  District  Court  December  3d,  1855,  decree 
reversed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court,  and  claim  confirmed,  in  22  How- 
ard, 436. 

332,  195,  S.  D.,  325.     Jose  Joaquin  Ortega  et  al.,  claimants  for  Yalle  de  Pamo, 

4  square  leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  Nqvember  25th,  1843,  by 
Manuel  Micheltorena  to  J.  J.  Ortega  and  Eduardo  Stokes;  claim  filed 
September  10th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  September  19th,  1854, 
and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  February  8th,  1858. 


_  333,  332,  S.  D.,  168.  Charles  M.  Weber,  claimant  for  Canada  de  San  Felipe  y 
Las  Animas,  2  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  August  17th, 
1839,  by  Manuel  Jimeno  to  Tomas  Bonn  ;  claim  filed  September  11th,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  May  8th,  1 855,  by  the  District  Court  January 
21st,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858;  containing  8,787.80 
acres. 

334,  80,  N.  D.     Joseph  P.  Thompson,  claimant  for  part  of  Entre  Napa,  1  square 

league,  in  Napa  county,  granted  May  9th,  1836,  by  Mariano  Chico  to  Nico- 
las Higuera;  claim  filed  September  Uth,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion December  13th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  January  14th,  1856,  and 
appeal  dismissed  September  2d,  1857. 

335,  217,  N.  D.,  452.     Cayetano  Juares,  claimant  for  Yokaya,  8  square  leagues, 

in  Mendocino  county,  granted  May  24th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  C.  Juares; 
claim  filed  September  11th,  1852,  and  rejected  by  the  Commission  Novem- 
ber 7th,  1854. 

_— -^  336,  104,  N.  D.,  23.  Juan  Jos6  Gonzales,  claimant  for  San  Antonio  or  El  Pesca- 
*  dero,  three-fourths  square  league,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  December 
24th,  1833,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  J.  J.  Gonzales ;  claim  filed  September  1 1th, 
1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  31st,  1854,  by  the  District 
Court  October  29th,  1855,  and  decree  affirmed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court 
in  22  Howard,  161 ;  containing  3,282.22  acres. 

337,  152,  N.  D.     Mariano  G.  Vallejo,  claimant  for  part  of  Entre  Napa,  300  varas 
square,  in  Napa  county,  granted  May  9th,  1836,  by  Mariano  Chico  to  Nico- 


APPENDIX.  47 

las  Higiiicra;  claim  filed  September  11th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
January  27th,  1854,  and  for  failure  of  prosecution  appeal  dismissed  April 
21st,  1856. 


338,  30,  S.  D.,  426.     David  W.  Alexander  and  Francis  Melius,  claimants  for 

Providencia,  1  square  league,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  March  23d, 
1 843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Vicente  de  la  Osa ;  claim  filed  September 
11th,  1852,  and  confirmed  by  the  Commission  October  18th,  1853. 

339,  194,  S.  D.,  335.     Samuel  Carpenter,  claimant  for  Santa  Gertrudes,  5  square 

leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  May  22d,  1 834,  by  Jose  Figueroa 
to  Josefa  CotadeNieto;  claim  filed  September  11th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  September  12tli,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  21st, 
1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858. 

—=■  340,  132,  N.  D.,  294.  Charles  Fossat,  claimant  for  Los  Capitancillos,  three-fourths 
square  league,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  September  1st,  1842,  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado  to  Justo  Larios;  claim  filed  September  13th,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  February  28th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  August 
17th,  1857,  decree  reversed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  and  cause  remanded, 

20  Howard,  413,  and  decision  of  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  on  the  survey, 

21  Howard,  445  ;  containing  3,360.48  acres. 


341,  203,  S.  D,,  390,  545.     Luis  Vignes,  claimant  for  Pauba,  6  square  leagues,  in 

San  Diego  county,  granted  November  9th,  1 844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena 
to  V.  Morago,  and  February  4th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico,  to  Vicente  Moraga  and 
Luis  Arenas;  claim  filed  September  13th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion May  2d,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  7th,  1857,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed March  1st,  1858;  containing  26,597.96  acres.     Patented. 

342,  6,   S.    D.   398.      Luis    Vignes,  claimant  for  Temeeula,  6  square   leagues, 

in  San  Diego  county,  granted  December  14th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Michelto- 
rena to  Feliz  Valdez;  claim  filed  September  13th,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  March  14th,  1854,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  September 
21st,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  October  18th,  1855  ;  containing  26,608.94 
acres.     Patented. 


343,  86,  S.  D.,  240,  436.     Henry  Dalton,  claimant  for  Santa  Anita,  3  square 

leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  provisionally  April  16th,  1841,  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado,  and  March  31st,  1845,  finally  by  Pio  Pico,  to  Perfecto 
Hugo  Beid;  claim  filed  September  14th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion January  17th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  October  24th,  1855,  and 
appeal  dismissed  February  23d,  1857;  containing  13,319.06  acres. 

344,  265,  S.  D.,  1,91.    Maria  Antonio  Mcchado,  claimant  for  Los  Virgenes,  2  square 

leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  April  6th,  1§37,  by  Juan  B.  Alva- 


\J 


48  APPENDIX. 

rado  to  Jos6  Maria  Dominguez ;  claim  filed  September  15tli,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  November  7th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  Feb- 
ruary 23d,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858. 


345,  173,  S.  D.,  157.     Manuel  Garfias,  claimant  for  San  Pascual,  3^  square  leagues, 

in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  November  28th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Michel- 
torena  to  M.  Garfias;  claim  filed  September  16th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  April  25th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  March  6th,  1856,  and 
appeal  dismissed  February  23d,  1857  ;  containing  13,693.93  acres. 

346,  161,  S.  D.,  425.     Abel  Stearns,  claimant  for  La  Laguna,  3  square  leagues,  in 

San  Diego  county,  granted  June  7th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Ju- 
lian Manriquez ;  claim  filed  September  18th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission February  14th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  14th,  1856, 
and  appeal  dismissed  February  24tli,  1857. 

347,  217,  S.  D.,  386.     F.  P.  F.  Temple  and  Juan  Matias  Sanchez,  claimants  for  La 

Merced,  1  square  league,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  October  8th,  1844, 
by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Casilda  Soto;  claim  filed  September  18th,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  October  14th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  De- 
cember 29th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858;  containing 
2,363.75  acres. 


348,  339,  S.  D.  William  Cary  Jones,  claimant  for  San  Luis  Eey  and  Pala,  12 
square  leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  May  18th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico 
to  Antonio  Jose  Scott  and  Jose  Antonio  Pico  ;  claim  filed  September  20th, 
1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  June  12th,  1855,  and  by  the  District 
Court  April  1st,  1861.  ,^o4^V0.  JjuU^-ll 

349,  287,  N.  D.  Leo  Norris,  claimant  for  part  of  San  Ramon,  1  square  league, 
in  Contra  Costa  county,  granted  August  1st,  1834,  by  Jos^  Figueroa  to 

J6s6  Maria  Amador;  claim  filed  September  20th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  August  1st,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  September  10th, 
1857;  containing  4,450.94  acres. 

-^  350,  156,  N.  D.,  432.  Thomas  S.  Page,  claimant  for  Cotate,  4  square  leagues,  in 
Sonoma  county,  granted  July  7th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Juan 
Castaneda;  claim  filed  September  21st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
August  27th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  14th,  1856,  and  appeal 
dismissed  March  21st,  1857  ;  containing  17,238.60  acres.     Patented. 


351,  17,  S.  D.  Juan  Temple,  claimant  for  Los  Cerritos,  5  square  leagues,  in  Los 
Angeles  county,  granted  May  22d,  1834,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Manuela 
Nieto;  claim  filed  September  21st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
April  11  til,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  February  28th,  1857,  and  appeal 
dismissed  January  12th,  1857. 


APPENDIX.  49 

K  —  352,  82,  N.  D.  Francisco  Sanchez,  claimant  for  San  Pedro,  2  square  leagues,  in 
San  Mateo  county,  granted  January  26th,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  F. 
Sanchez;  claim  filed  September  22d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
December  13th,  1853,  and  ajipeal  dismissed  March  20th,  1857;  containing 
8,926.46  acres. 

^  353, 169,  S.  D.,  37,  402.  Jacob  P.  Leese,  claimant  for  Punta  de  Pinos,  described  by 
boundaries,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  May  24th,  1 833,  by  Jose  Figueroa 
to  Jose  Maria  Armenta,  and  October  4th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to 
Jose  Abrego  ;  claim  filed  September  22d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion June  13th,  1854,  and  February  8th,  1855. 

— -354,  269,  N.  D.,  217.  Candelario  Miramontes,  claimant  for  Arroyo  de  los  Pilar- 
citos,  1  square  league,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  January  2d,  1841,  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  C.  Miramontes  ;  claim  filed  September  22d,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  February  6th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  Feb- 
ruary 16th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  21st,  1857;  containing 
4,424.12  acres. 

355,  67,  S.  D.  Salvador  Espinoza,  claimant  for  Bolsa  de  las  Escorpinas,  2  square 
leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  October  7th,  1837,  by  Juan  B.  Alva- 
rado to  S.  Espinoza;  claim  filed  September  22d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  December  28th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  September  24th, 
1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857  ;  containing  6,415.96  acres. 


356,  42,  S.  D.,  376.  Francisco  Arce,  claimant  for  Santa  Ysabel,  4  square  leagues, 
in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  May  12th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Michelto- 
rena to  F.  Arce;  claim  filed  September  22d,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commis- 
sion December  13th,  1853,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  January 
12th,  1857. 


357,  184,  N.  D.  Andres  Pico,  claimant  for  Moquelamo,  11  square  leagues,  in 
Calaveras  county,  granted  June  6th,  1 846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  A.  Pico ;  claim 
filed  September  22d,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  September  26th, 
1854,  confirmed, by  the  District  Court  April  24th,  1857,  decree  reversed  by 
the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  and  cause  remanded  for  further  evidence,  in  22 
Howard,  406. 


^,-»~  ■  358,  89,  N.  D.,  259.  Salvador  Castro,  claimant  for  part  of  San  Gregorio,  1 
square  league,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  April  6th,  1839,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  Antonio  Buelna;  claim  filed  September  22d,  1852,  rejected  by 
the  Commission  December  27th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  Jan- 
uary 14th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  July  23d,  1857;  containing  4,439.31 
acres.    Patented. 

-    359,  350,  N.  D.    Jos6  Antonio  Alvisu,  claimant  for  Canada  de  Verde  y  Arroyo 
D 


50  APPENDIX. 

de  la  Pnrisima,  2  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  April  25th, 
1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Jose  Maria  Alvisu;  claim  filed  September 
22d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  July  10th,  1855,  by  the  District 
Court  March  9th,  1857,  decision  of  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  as  to  the  right 
of  appeal,  20  Howard,  261,  and  decree  of  confirmation  affirmed  by  the  U.  S. 
Supreme  Court,  23  Howard,  318;  containing  8,905.58  acres. 

360,  23,  S.  D.,  380.  Jose  Maria  Aguila/  claimant  for  Canada  de  los  Nogales,  one- 
half  square  league,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  August  30th,  1844,  by 
Manuel  Micheltorena  to  J.  M.  Aguila;  claim  filed  September  25th,  i852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  11th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  Jan- 
uary 21st,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  21st,  1857. 

f  361,  513,  S.  D.,  196,  203.     Juan  Bandini,  claimant  for  Jurupa,  7  square  leagues, 

in  San  Bernardino  county,  granted  September  28th,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Al- 
varado to  J.  Bandini;  claim  filed  September  25th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  October  17th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  April  5th,  1861. 

__  362,  120,  S.  D.,  214.  Isaac  J.  Sparks,  claimant  for  Pismo,  2  square  leagues,  in 
San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  November  18th,  1840,  by  Manuel  Jimeno 
to  Jose  Ortega;  claim  filed  Sei^tember  29tli,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission March  21st,  1854,  by  theT)istrict  Court  December  24th,  1856,  and 
appeal  dismissed  March  1st,  1858;  containing  8,838.89  acres. 

^.,  363,  69,  S.  D.,  321.  Isaac  J.  Sparks,  claimant  for  Huasna,  5  square  leagues,  in 
San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  December  8th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Michel- 
torena to  I.  J.  Sparks;  claim  filed  September  29th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  March  21st,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  8th,  1857, 
and  appeal  dismissed  March  1st,  1858;  containing  21,422.08  acres. 

364,  121,  S.  D.     Henry  Dalton,  claimant  for  Azusa,  3  square  leagues,  in  San 

Bernardino  county,  2  leagues  granted  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado,  one  under  the 
name  of  San  Jose  to  Ignacio  Palomares  and  Kicardo  Vejar  April  15th, 
1837,  Avith  another  to  same  grantees  by  Luis  Arenas  under  the  name  of 
Azusa  March  14th,  1840,  and  a  third  one  by  Manuel  Jimeno  to  Luis  Arenas 
November  8th,  1841 ;  claim  filed  September  29th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
^Commission  January  21st,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  March  6th,  1855,  and 
.appeal  dismissed  June  4th,  1857  ;  containing  27,151.327  acres. 

365,  122,  S.  D.     Ygnacio  Palomares,  claimant  for  part  of  San  Jose,  2  square 

leagues,  in  San  Bernardino  county,  granted  April  15tli,  1837^,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  Y.  Palomares  ;  claim  filed  September  29th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  January  31st,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  4th, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  23d,  1857. 

y^        ^-.  366,  420,  N.  D.     Andres  Castillero,  claimant  for  the  quicksilver  mine  New  Alma- 


APPENDIX.  51 

den,  formerly  called  Santa  Clara,  discovered  by  him"in  1845,  in  Santa  Clara 
county,  with  two  leagues  of  land  granted  to  him  by  the  President  of  Mexko, 
May  23d,  1846.  Possession  of  the  mine  was  given  by  the  Alcalde,  Antonio 
Maria  Pico,  December  13th,  1845,  with  3,000  varas  of  land  in  all  directions 
from  the  mouth  of  the  mine.  Claim  filed  September  30th,  1852.  The 
Commission,  on  the  eighth  of  January,  1856,  confirmed  the  grant  of  3,000 
varas,  and  rejected  all  other  claims.  On  the  ground  of  fraud,  the  United 
States,  on  the  twenty-ninth  of  October,  1858,  obtained  an  injunction  from 
the  United  States  Circuit  Court  to  stop  the  working  of  tlie  mine.  On  the 
eighth  of  January,  1861,  the  District  Court,  rejecting  all  claims  to  land, 
confirmed  the  mining  rights,  with  seven  pcrtincncias  for  mining  purposes  ; 
and  all  shadow  of  fraud  having  been  dispelled,  the  injunction  was  dissolved, 
on  the  twenty-sixth  of  January,  1861.  [The  pertinencia  varies  from  112-^ 
to  200  varas  square,  according  to  the  inclination  of  the  vein.] 


y-  . —  367,  157,  N.  D.  Gervesio  Arguello,  Executor  of  the  heirs  of  Jose  Dario  Ar- 
guello,  claimants  for  Las  Pulgas,  described  by  boundaries,  in  San  Mateo 
county,  granted  in  1795,  by  Diego  Borica  to  Jos6  Dario  Arguello;  claim 
filed  September  30th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  August  1st,  1854, 
and  for  failure  of  prosecutioiTappeal  dismissed  April  21st,  1856. 


n 


368,  305,  S.  D.,  519.     Benj.  D.  Wilson  et  ah.,  claimants  for  San  Jos6  de  Buenos 

Ayres,  1  square  league,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  February  24th, 
1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Maximo  Alanis;  claim  filed  October  2d, 
1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  February  20th,  1855,  by  the  District 
Court  February  18th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  June  4th,  1857  ;  contain- 
ing 4,438.69  acres. 

369,  123,  S.  D.,  184.     Agustin  Machado  et  al.,  claimants  for  Ballona,   1   square 

league,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  November  27th,  1839,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  Agustin  Machado  ei  a/. ;  claim  filed  October  2d,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  February  14th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  De- 
cember 19th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  28th,  1857;  containing 
13,919.90  acres. 


370,  214,  S.  D.  Leon  Victor  Prudhomme,  Administrator,  claimant  for  Cuca- 
monga,  3  square  leagues,  in  San  Bernardino  county,  granted  April  16th, 
1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Tiburcio  Tapia;  claim  filed  October  2d, 
1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  October  17th,  1854,  and  confirmed  by  the 
District  Court  December  31st,  1856. 


371,  309,  S.  D.  Anacleto  Lestrade,  claimant  for  Rosa  de  Castillo,  described  by 
boundaries,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  June  25th,  1831,  by  Manuel 
Victoria  to  Juan  Ballestero;  claim  filed  October  2d,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  April  3d,  1855,  and  for  failure  of  prosecution  appeal  dismissed 
December  17th,  1856. 


i) 


52  APPENDIX. 

372,  353,  S.  D.  Januario  Abila,  claimant  for  Las  Cienegas,  1  square  league,  in 
Los  Angeles  county,  granted  in  1823,  by  Jose  de  la  Guerra  y  Noriega  and 
Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Francisco  Abila;  claim  filed  October  4th,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  June  26th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  June 
8th,  1857  ;  containing  4,439.05  acres. 


373,  87,  S.  D.,  61.     Pio  Pico  et  al.,  claimants  for  Paso  de  Bartolo  Viejo,  2  square 

leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  June  12th,  1835,  by  Jose  Figueroa 
to  Juan  Crispin  Perez;  claim  filed  October  4th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  December  27th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  February  4th, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857. 

374,  46,  S.  D.,  236.     Andres  Duarte,  claimant  for  Azusa,  1-^  square  leagues,  in 

Los  Angeles  county,  granted  May  10th,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  A. 
Duarte;  claim  filed  October  6th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  No- 
vember 4th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  September  19th,  1855,  and  appeal 
dismissed  February  23d,  1857  ;  containing  6,595.62  acres. 

375,  124,  S.  D.,  464.     Agustin  Olvera,  claimant  for  Cuyamaca,  11  square  leagues, 

in  San  Diego  county,  granted  August  11th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  A.  Olvera; 
claim  filed  October  6th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April  4th,  1854, 
and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  March  15th,  1858. 

376,  235,  S.  D.,  257.     Daniel  Sexton,  claimant  for  1,000  varas  square,  in  Los 

Angeles  county,  granted  November  5th,  1841,  by  Manuel  Jimeno  to  Jose 
Maria  Kamirez  ;  claim  filed  October  6th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion October  10th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  28th,  1856,  and 
appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858. 

377,  259,  S.  D.    Daniel  Sexton,  claimant  for  500  varas  square,  in  Los  Angeles 

county,  granted  May  19th,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Vicente  de  la 
Osa;  claim  filed  October  6th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  Novem- 
ber 14th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  27th,  1856,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed February  24th,  1857. 

378,  343,  S.  D.     Eulogio  de  Cells,  claimant  for  Mission  of  San  Fernando,  14 

square  leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  June  1 7th,  1 846,  by  Pio 
Pico  to  E.  de  Cells;  claim  filed  October  7th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission July  3d,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  15th,  1858;  containing 
121,619.24  acres. 

379  292,  N.  D. ;  392  S.  D.,  (sent  to  the  Southern  District  February  23d,  1857) 
458.  Vicente  de  la  Osa  et  al.,  claimants  for  Encino,  1  square  league,  in 
Los  Angeles  county,  granted  July  8th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Ramon, 
Francisco  and  Roque;  claim  filed  October  8th,  1852,  and  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  March  20th,  1855. 


k 


APPENDIX.  53 

f  380,  378,  S.  D.    Juan  Bandini,  claimant  for  Cajon  de  Muscupiabe,  described  by 

boundaries,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  December  18th, ^1839,  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado  to  J.  Bandini;  claim  filed  October  8th,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  January  8th,  1856,  and  for  failure  of  prosecution  appeal  dis- 
missed December  22d,  1856. 

381,  125,  S.  D,,  382,  394.     Bruno  Abila,  claimant  for  Aguage  del  Centinela,  one- 

half  square  league,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  September  14th,  1844, 
by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Ygnacio  Machado;  claim  filed  October  8th, 
'  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  March  21st,  1854,  and  by  the  District 
Court  February  21st,  1856. 

382,  126,  S.  D.     Bernardo  Yorba,  claimant  for  La  Sierra,  4  square  leagues,  in 

San  Bernardino  county,  granted  June  15th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  B.  Yorba  ; 
claim  filed  October  9tli,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  February  14th, 
1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  January  22d,  1857. 

383,  88,  S.  D.,  195.     Maria  de  Jesus  Garcia  et  al.,  claimant  for  Los  Nogales,  1 

square  league,  in  San  Bernardino  county,  granted  March  13th,  1840,  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Jose  de  la  Cruz  Linares ;  claim  filed  October  9th, 
1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  17th,  1854,  by  the  District 
Court  January  16th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858;  contain- 
ing 464.72  acres. 

384,  297,  S.  D.     Bernardo  Yorba,  claimant  for  El  Eincon,  1  square  league,  m 

San  Bernardino  county,  granted  April  8th,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
Juan  Bandini ;  claim  filed  October  9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
February.  13th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  February  11th,  1857  ;  con- 
taining 4,431.47  acres. 

^  385,  127,  S.  D.,  270,  544.  John  Roland  and  Julian  Workman,  claimants  for  La 
Puente,  described  by  boundaries,  in  Los  Angeles  and  San  Bernardino  coun- 
ties, granted  July  22d,,1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  J.  Roland  and  Julian  Work- 
man; claim  filed  October  9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April 
4th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  February  24th,  1857  ;  containing 
48,790.55  acres. 

.— -  386,  164,  N.  D.  Sebastian  Peralta  and  Jose  Hernandez,  claimants  for  Rinconada 
de  los  Gatos,  I5  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  May  21st, 
184Q,..by  Juan  B,  Alvarado  to  S.  Peralta  and  J.  Hernandez;  claim  filed 
October  9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  August  8th,  1854,  by  the 
District  Court  March  10th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  13th,  1856  , 
containing  6,631.44  acres.     Patented. 

387,  89,  S.  D.,  24.     Bernardo  Yorba,  claimant  for  Canada  de  Santa  Ana,  3  square 
leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  August  1st,  1834,  by  Jose  Figue- 


54  APPENDIX. 

roa  to  B.  Yorba;  claim  filed  October  9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion January  24th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  October  9th,  1855,  and  ap- 
peal dismissed  February  23d,  1857  ;  containing  13,328.53  acres. 

ly  3S8,  128,  S.  D.,  141.     Ricardo  Vejar,  claimant  for  part  of  San  Jose,  described  by 

boundaries,  in  San  Bernardino  county,  granted  April  15th,  1837,  and  March 
14th,  1840,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  R.  Vejar,  Ignacio  Palomares  and  Luis 
Arenas;  claim  filed  October  9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  Jan- 
uary 31st,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  4th,  1856,  and  appeal  dis-         — 
missed  February  21st,  1857  ;  containing  22,720.28  acres. 

,,  389,  90,  S.  D.,  140.  Juan  Sanchez,  claimant  for  Santa  Clara  or  El  Norte,  de- 
scribed by  boundaries,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  May  6tli,  1837,  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  J.  Sanchez;  claim  filed  October  9th,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  January  24th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  19th, 
1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858;  containing  13,988.91  acres. 

390,320,  N,  D.,  18.  Joaquin  Ysidro  Castro,  Administrator,  claimant  for  San 
Pablo,  4  square  leagues,  in  Contra  Costa  county,  3  leagues  granted  by  Jo?6^ 
Figueroa,  June  12th,  1834,  to  Francisco  Castro,  deceased,  and  to  his  heirs, 
and  on  the  13th  the  surplus  lands  to  Joaquin  Ysidro  Castro  and  the  heirs  of 
Francisco  Castro ;  claim  filed  October  9th,  1 852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission April  17th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  February  24th,  1858,  and 
appeal  dismissed  March  10th,  1858;  containing  19,394.40  acres.  "~"*^ 

391,  167,  S.  D.  Enrique  Abila,  claimant  for  Tajauta,  1  square  lea'gue,  in 
Los  Angeles  county,  granted  July  5th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to 
Anastasio  Abila;  claim  filed  October  11th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission August  22d,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  May  10th,  1856,  and  by 
the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court ;  containing  3,559.86  acres. 

■392,  129,  S.  D.,  461.     Urbano  Odon  and  Manuel  et  al.^  claimants  for  El  Escorpion, 
1 1  square  leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  August  7th,  1845,  by 
Pio  Pico  to  U.   Odon  and  Manuel;  claim  filed  October'  11th,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  April  25th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  May  6th,      "*"* 
1859. 

393,  406,  N.  D.,  329.     Angel  and  Maria  Chabolla,  heirs  of  Anastasio  Chabolla, 

claimants  for  Sanjon  de  los  Moquclumnes,  8  square  leagues,  in  Sacramento 
and  San  Joaquin  counties,  granted  January  24th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Michel- 
torena to  'A.  Chabolla;  claim  filed  October  16tli,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  January  24th,  1854,  and  September  4th,  1855,  confirmed  by 
the  District  Court  May  10th,  1857,  and  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court;  con-  — • 
taining  35,509.97  acres. 

394,  337,  S.  D.,  438.     Juan  Foster,  claimant  for  Potreros  de  San  Juan  Capistrano,       ..^ 


APPENDIX.  55 

in  Los  Anj^eles  and  San  Bernardino  counties,  granted  April  5th,  1845,  by 
Pio  Pico  to  J.  Poster;  claim  filed  October  16th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  June  26th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  February  21st,  1857, 
and  appeal  dismissed  June  4th,  1857;  containing  1,167.74  acres. 

395,  228,  S.  D.,  288,  541.     Andres  Ybarra,  claimant  for  Los  Encinitos,  1  square 

league,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  July  3d,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado 
to  A.  Ybarra;  claim  filed  October  16th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion October  31st,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  October  16th,  1855,  and  ap- 
peal dismissed  February  24th,  1857  ;  containing  4,431.03  acres. 

396,  250,  S.  D.,  437.    Juan  Foster,  claimant  for  Mission  Vieja  or  La  Paz,  in  Los 

Angeles  county,  granted  April  4th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Agustin  Olvera; 
claim  filed  October  16th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  October  31st, 
1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  21st,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  June 
4th,  1857  ;  containing  46,432.65  acres. 

397,  243,  S.  D.,  439.     Juan  Matias  Sanchez,  claimant  for  Potrero  Grande,  1  square 

league,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  April  8th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to 
Manuel  Antonio;  claim  filed  October  18th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission October  24th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  29th,  1856, 
and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858;  containing  4,431.96  acres.  Pat- 
ented. 


398,  273,  S.  D.     Manuel  Dominguez  et  at.,  claimants  for  San  Pedro,  10  square 

leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  December  31st,  1822,  to  Juan  Jose 
Dominguez;  claim  filed  October  19th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
,''  October  I7th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  20th,  1856,  and  appeal 

dismissed  June  1st,  1857;  containing  43,119,13  acres.     Patented. 

399,  130,  S.  D.,  285.     Juan  Abila  et  al.,  claimants  for  El  Niguel,  3  square  leagues, 

in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  June  21st,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
J.  Abila  et  al.  ;  claim 'filed  October  19th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion April  25th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  25th,  1856,  and  appeal 
.     dismissed  February  24th,  1857. 

400,  372,  S.  D.     Andres  Pico  et  al.,  claimants  for  Los  Coyotes,  10  square  leagues, 

in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  in  1784,  by  Pedro  Fajes  to  Manuel  Nieto, 
and  May  22d,  1834,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Juan  Jos6  Nieto,  heir  of  Manuel 
Nieto  ;  claim  filed  October  20th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  Sep- 
tember 25th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  February  18th,  1857  ;  contain- 
ing 56,979,72  acres. 

401,  355,   S.  D.,  181.    Andres  Pico  et  al.,  claimants  for  La  Habra,  \\  square 

leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  October  22d,  XS3?,  by  Manuel  Ji- 
meno  to  Mariano  R.  Roldan;  claim  filed  October  20th,  1852,  confirmed  by 


56  APPENDIX. 

the  Commission  July  3d,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  February  18th,  1857, 
and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858  ;  containing  6,698.57  acres. 

402,  208,  S.  D.     Eamon  Yorba  et  al.,  claimants  for  one-half  of  Las  Bolsas,  de- 

scribed by  boundaries,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  in  1784,  by  Pedro 
Fajes  to  Manuel  Nieto,  and  May  22d,  lJ34,.by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Catarina 
Kuiz,  widow  of  M.  Nieto ;  claim  filed  October  20th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  September  26th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  17th, 
1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858;  containing  34,486.13  acres. 
(See  No.  459.) 

403,  381,  S.  D.     Julio  Berdugo  et  al.,  claimants  for  San  Eafael,  8  square  leagues, 

in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  October  20th,  1784,  by  Pedro  Fajes,  and 
confirmed  by  Borica  January  12th,  1798,  to  Jose  Maria  Berdugo ;  claim 
filed  October  21st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  September  11th, 
1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  June  4th,  1857. 

404,  290,  S.  D.     Abel  Stearns,  claimant  for  Alamitos,  6  square  leagues,  in  Los 

Angeles  county,  granted  in  1784,  by  Pedro  Fajes  to  Manuel  Nieto,  and 
May  22d,  1 834,  by  Jos6  Figueroa  to  Juan  Jose  Nieto,  heir  of  M.  Nieto ; 
claim  filed  October  21st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  February 
13th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  February  23d,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed 
March  4th,  1857;  containing  17,789.79  acres. 
V'" 

405,  205,  S.  D.,  244.    Joaquin  Euiz,  claimant  for  La  Bolsa  Chica,  2  square  leagues, 

in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  July  1st,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  J. 
Ruiz;  claim  filed  October  21st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  Sep- 
tember 26th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  13th,  1857,  and  appeal 
dismissed  June  4th,  1857  ;  containing  8,107.46  acres. 

406,  185,   S.  D.,  279.     Josd  Sepulveda,  claimant  for  San  Joaquin,   11  square 

leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  being  La  Cienega  de  las  Eanas,  granted 
April  15th,  1837,  and  an  augmentation  granted  May  13th,  1842,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  J.  Sepulveda;  claim  filed  October  22d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  April  25th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  11th,  1856, 
and  appeal  dismissed  January  21st,  1858;  containing  48,803.16  acres. 

407,  367,  S.  D.,  493.     Pio  Pico,  claimant  for  Jamual,  2  square  leagues,  in  San 

Diego  county,  granted  April  20th,  1831,  by  Manuel  Vittoria  to  Pio  Pico ; 
claim  filed  October  22d,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April  25th,  1855, 
and  by  the  District  Court  March  5th,  1858. 

408,  62,  S.  D.     Antonio  Valenzuela  and  Juan  Alvitre,  claimants  for  Potrero  de 

la  Mission  Vieja  de  San  Gabriel,  1,000  varas  by  500,  in  Los  Angeles 
county,  granted  November  9th,  1 844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  J.  Alvitre 
and  A.  Valenzuela;  claim  filed  October  23d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 


APPENDIX.  67 

mission  December  13th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  January  25th,  1856,  and 
appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857. 


409,  131,  S.  D.  Francisco  Higuera  et  al.,  claimants  for  Rincon  de  los  Bueyes, 
three-fifths  square  league,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  December  7th, 
1821,  by  Jos6  de  la  Guerra  y  Noriega,  and  July  10th,  1843,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena,  to  Bernardo  Higuera;  claim  filed  October  23d,  1852,  rejected 
by  the  Commission  February  28th,  1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  District 
Court  April  16th,  1861. 


y  410,  363,  S.  D.  Juan  Foster,  claimant  for  Mission  of  San  Juan  Capistrano,  in 
Los  Angeles  county,  granted  December  6th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  J.  Foster; 
claim  filed  October  23d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  July  17th, 
1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  1st,  1858. 


411,  238,  S.  D.,  295.    Juan  Maria  Marron,  claimant  for  Agua  Hedionda,  3  square 

leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  August  10th,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Al- 
varado  to  J.  M.  Marron;  claim  filed  October  23d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  October  24th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  October  6th,  1855, 
and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1859;  containing  13,311.01  acres. 

412,  216,  S.  D.,  247.     Juan  Foster,  claimant  for  Trabuco,  5  square  leagues,  in 

Los  Angeles  county,  2  leagues  provisionally  granted  February  16th,  1841, 
and  finally  July  31st,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Santiago  Arguello  ef 
al.,  and  3  leagues  granted  to  Juan  Foster  by  Pio  Pico  April  21st,  1846; 
claim  filed  October  23d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  September 
26th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  21st,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed 
February  11th,  1858;  containing  22,184.47  acres. 


413,  229,  S.  D.  William  Workman,  claimant  for  Cajon  de  los  Negros,  3  square 
leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  June  15th,  J.  846,  by  Pio  Pico  to 
Ygnacio  Coronel;  claim  filed  October  23d,  1852,  and  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission December  12th,  1854. 


414,  374,  S.  D.  Josefa  Montalva  et  al.,  claimants  for  Temascal,  described  by 
boundaries,  in  San  Bernardino  county,  granted  by  Jose  Maria  Echeandia  to 
Leandro  Serano ;  claim  filed  October  26th,  1852,  and  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission September  18th,  1855. 


415,  132,  S.  D.  Michael  White,  claimant  for  San  Gabriel,  500  varas  square,  in 
Los  Angeles  county,  granted  March  27th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  M.  White; 
claim  filed  October  26th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  February  28th, 
1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  21st,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  Feb- 
ruar;  24th,  1857. 


^t^ 


58  APPENDIX. 

416,  133,  S.  D.,  350.     Maria  Ignacio  Berdugo,  claimant  for  De  los  Felis,  1-^ 

square  leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  March  22d,  1843,  by  Man- 
uel Micheltorena  to  M.  I.  Berdugo  ;  claim  filed  October  26th,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  February  28th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  Jan- 
uary 13th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858. 

417,  134,  S.  T>.     Lugardo  Aguilar  and  Pascuala  Garcia,  his  wife,  claimants  for 

500  varas  by  250,  near  San  Gabriel,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  May 
15th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Manuel  Dolivera;  claim  filed  Octo- 
ber 26th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  February  28th,  1854,  by  the 
District  Court  March  3d,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857. 

418,  135,  S.  D.     Kafael  Valenzuela  et  ah,  claimants  for  466  varas  by  264,  near 

San  Gabriel,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  May  16th,  1843,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  Prospero  Valenzuela;  claim  filed  October  26th,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  February  28th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  Feb- 
ruary 1st,  1858. 

419,  136,  S.  D.,  476.     Juan  Silvas,  claimant  for  500  varas  by  250,  near  San  Ga- 

briel, in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  May  15th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Michel- 
torena to  Manuel  Dolivera;  claim  filed  October  26th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  March  14th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  24th, 
1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858. 

420,  137,  S.  D.     Santiago  Rios  or  Riva,  claimant  for  300  varas  square,  near  San 

Juan  Capistrano,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  July  5th,  1 843,  by  Man- 
uel Micheltorena  to  S.  Rios;  claim  filed  October  26th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  February  28th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  March  4th, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  23d,  1857. 

421,  186,  S.  D.     Teodocio  Yorba,  claimant  for  Lomas  de  Santiago,  4  square 

leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  May  26th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to 
Teodocio  Yorba;  claim  filed  October  26th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion August  15th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  11th,  1856,  and 
appeal  dismissed  January  21st,  1858. 

422,  386,  S.  D.     City  of  Los  Angeles,  claimant  for  16  square  leagues,  granted 

May  26th,  1781,  to  Pueblo  de  los  Angeles;  claim  filed  October  26th,  1852, 
'  confirmed  by  the  Commission  February  5th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed 

February  1st,  1858;  containing  17,172.37  acres. 

423,  193,  S.  D.     Concepcion  Nieto  et  al.,  claimants  for  Santa  Gertrudes,  5  square 

leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  in  1784,  by  Pedro  Fajcs  to  Manuel 
Nieto,  and  May  22d,  1834,  by  Jos^  Figueroa  to  Josefa  Cota,  Avidow  of  A. 
M.  Nieto,  heir  of  M.  Nieto;  claim  filed  October  28th,  1852,  and  rejected  by 
the  Commission  September  12th,  1854. 


APPENDIX.  59 

424,  138,  S.  D.,  530.     Michael  White,  cLaimant  for  200  A'aras  square,  near  San 

Gabriel,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  May  15tli,  1843,  by  Manuel  Mich- 
eltorena  to  Emilio  Joaquin ;  claim  filed  October  28th,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  February  28th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  pros- 
ecution January  7th,  1860. 

425,  139,  S.  D.,  434.     Andrew  J.  Courtney  and  Wife,  claimants  for  700  varas  by 

400,  near  San  Gabriel,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  March  15th,  1845, 
by  Pio  Pico  to  Ramon  Valencia  et  ah;  claim  filed  October  28th,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  February  28th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court 
December  17th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  24th,  1857  ;  containing 
49.29  acres. 

426,  162,  S.  D.,  496.     Domingo  Yorba,  claimant  for  Canada  de  San  Vicente,  3 

square  leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  January  25th,  1846,  by  Pio 
Pico  to  Juan  Lopez ;  claim  filed  October  29th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission May  21st,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  1st,  1858. 

427,  376,  S.  D.,  532.     Tomas  Sanchez  et  ah,  claimants  for  La  Cienega  or  Paso  de 

la  Tigera,  six-sevenths  of  1  square  league,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted 
May  16th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Vicente  Sanchez;  claim  filed 
October  29th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  July  10th,  1855,  by  the 
District  Court  January  27th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  21st,  1858. 

428,  183,  S.  D.,  560.     Agustin  Olvera,  claimant  for  Los  Alamos  y  Agua  Caliente, 

6  square  leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  May  27th,  1846,  by  Pio 
Pico  to  Francisco  Lopez  et  al.;  claim  filed  October  29th,  1852,  rejected 
by  the  Commission  August  15th,  1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court 
December  13th,  1856. 

429,  170,   S.  D.,  547.     Jos6  Maria  Flores,  claimant  for  La  Liebre,   11  square 

leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  April  21st,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to 
J.  M.  Flores;  claim  filed  October  30th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
May  2d,  1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  February  11th,  1857. 

430,  60,  S.  D.,  148.     Gabriel  Ruiz  et  al.,  claimants  for  Calleguas,  described  by 

boundaries,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  May  10th,  1847,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  Jose  Pedro  Ruiz;  claim  filed  November  1st,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  November  4th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  December 
3d,   1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  23d,  1857;  containing  9,998.29 


431,  31,  S.  D.,  274,  558.  Jose  Serano,  claimant  for  Canada  de  los  Alisos,  2 
square  league,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  part  granted  May  3d,  1 842,  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado,  and  May  27th,  1846,  additional  extent  by  Pio  Pico,  to  J.  Se- 
rano ;  claim  filed  November  1st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  Octo- 


60  APPENDIX. 

ber  21st,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  December  6th,  1855,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed February  23d,  1857;  containing  10,668,81  acres. 

y  432,  33,  S.  D.,  444.     Jorge  Morillo  et  al.,  claimants  for  Potrero  de  Felipe  Lugo, 

described  by  boundaries,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  April  18th,  1845, 
by  Pio  Pico  to  Teodoro  Romero  et  ah;  claim  filed  November  1st,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  October  18th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court 
September  19th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  23d,  1857;  contain- 
ing 2,042.81  acres. 

433,  182,  S.  D.,  231.     Isaac  Williams,  claimant  for  Santa  Ana  del  Chino,  5 

square  leagues,  in  San  Bernardino  county,  granted  March  26th,  1841,  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Antonio  Maria  Lugo;  claim  filed  November  1st, 
1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  23d,  1854,  by  the  District  Court 
January  13th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858. 

434,  335,  S.  D.,  522,     Isaac  Williams,  claimant  for  addition  to  Santa  Ana  del 

Chino,  3  square  leagues,  in  San  Bernardino  county,  granted  April  1st,  1843, 
by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  I.  Williams;  claim  filed  November  1st,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  May  8th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  Janu- 
ary 13th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858. 

y  435,  65,  S.  D.     Pablo  Apis,  claimant  for  Temecula,  one  by  one-half  league, 

granted  May  7th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  P.  Apis;  claim  filed  November  1st, 

1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  November  15th,  1853,  and  confirmed  by 
the  District  Court  February  21st,  1857. 

^  436,  91,  S.  D.,  60.     Santiago  E.  Arguello,  claimant  for  Melyo,  in  San  Diego 

county  and  Lower  California,  granted  November  25th,  1833,  by  Jos6  Figue- 
roa  to  S.  E.  Arguello;  claim  filed  November  1st,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  December  20th,  1853,  and  by  the  District  Court  September 
20th,  1855. 

\  437,  66,  S.  D.     Magdalena  Estudillo,  claimant  for  Otay,  2  square  leagues,  in  San 

Diego  county,  granted  May  4th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  M.  Estudillo ;  claim 
filed  November  1st,   1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  November  4th, 

1853,  by  the  District  Court  February  11th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  Feb- 
ruary 24th,  1857;  containing  6,657.98  acres. 

^  438,  163,  S.  D.,  572.     Antonio  Coronel,  claimant  for  Sierra  de  los  V«rdugos,  de- 

scribed by  boundaries,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  June  15th,  1846,  by 
Pio  Pico  to  A.  Coronel;  claim  filed  November  1st,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  January  27th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prose- 
cution October  24th,  1855. 


439,  189,  S.  D.,  393.     Jos6  A.  Serano  et  al,  claimants  for  Pauma,  3  square    ^ 


APPENDIX.  61 

leagues,  granted  November  9th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  J.  A. 
Serano  et  al;  claim  filed  November  1st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion May  16th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  1st,  1858. 


^  440,  140,  S.  D.  Juan  P.  Ontiveros,  claimant  for  San  Juan  Cajon  de  Santa  Ana, 
granted  May  13th,  1837,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  J.  P.  Ontiveros ;  claim 
filed  November  1st,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April  11th,  1854, 
and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  December  4th,  1855. 


441,  92,  S.  D.,  72,  463,  529.  Juliana  Lopez  Osuna,  claimant  for  San  Dieguito,  2 
square  leagues,  1  granted  in  1840  or  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado,  and  the 
other  August  11th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Juan  Maria  Osuna;  claim  filed 
November  1st,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  January  24th,  1854,  and 
confirmed  by  the  District  Court  March  4th,  1858. 


442,  48,  S.  D.,  17.  Apolinaria  Lorenzana,  claimant  for  Jamacho,  2  square  leagues, 
in  San  Diego  county,  granted  April  27th,  1,840,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  A. 
Lorenzana;  claim  filed  November  1st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
November  4th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  February  4th,  1856,  and  appeal 
dismissed  February  23d,  1857  ;  containing  8,881.16  acres. 


j<^  443,  269,  S.  D.,  521.  Louis  Roubideau,  claimant  for  San  Jacinto  and  San  Gre- 
gorio,  granted  March  22d,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Santiago  John- 
son; claim  filed  November  1st,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  January 
2d,  1855,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  February  29th,  1860. 


444,  199,  N.  D.  Andres  Pico,  claimant  for  Arroyo  Seco,  11  square  leagues,  in 
Sacramento,  Amador  and  San  Joaquin  counties,  granted  May  8th,  1840,  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Teodocio  Yorba;  claim  filed  November  1st,  1852,  re- 
jected by  the  Commission  February  27th,  1855,  confirmed  by  the  District 
Court  April  21st,  1856,  and  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court;  containing 
48,857.52  acres. 


445,  141,  S.  D.,  330.  Isidor  Reyes  et  ah,  claimants  for  Voca  de  Santa  Monica, 
I5  square  leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  June  19th,  1839,  by 
Manuel  Jimeno  to  Francisco  Marques  et  al. ;  claim  filed  November  1st, 
1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  4th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court 
December  10th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858. 


446,  93,  S.  D.,  565.  Jose  Loreto  Sepulveda  et  al.,  claimants  for  Los  Palos  Verdes, 
in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  June  3d,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  J.  L.  Sepul- 
veda e^  a/.;  claim  filed  November  1st,  18527confirmed  by  the  Commission 
December  20th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  December  10th,  1856,  and  ap- 
peal dismissed  March  4th,  1858;  containing  31,629.13  acres. 


62  APPENDIX. 

447,  63,  S.  D.,  443.     Jos6  Ledesma,  claimant  for  400  by  200  varas,  near  San  Ga- 

briel, in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  June  3d,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Jos6 
Ledesma;  claim  filed  November  1st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
December  6th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  February  11th,  1857,  and  appeal 
dismissed  March  4th,  1858. 

448,  94,  S.  D.     Prancisco  Sales,  claimant  for  50  by  250  varas,  near  San  Gabriel, 

in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  April  18th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  P.  Sales ; 
claim  filed  November  1st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  January 
17th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  20th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed 
February  24th,  1857. 

449,  95,  S.  D.,  563.     Simeon,  (Indian)  clahnaut  for  500  by  200  varas,  near  San 

Gabriel,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  June  1st,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to 
Simeon;  claim  filed  November  1st,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
December  13th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  February  18th,  1856,  and  appeal 
dismissed  February  24th,  1857. 

450,  51,  S.  D.     Andres  Duarte  et  ah,  claimants  for  25  by  40  varas,  near  San  Ga- 

briel, in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  April  25th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  A. 
Duarte  etal.;  claim  filed  November  1st,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
December  6th,  1853,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  Octo- 
ber 25th,  1855. 


451,  192,  S.  D.,  205.     Lorenzo  Soto,  claimant  for  Los  Vallecitos,  2  square  leagues, 

in  San  Diego  county,  granted  April  22d,  1840,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
Jose  Maria  Alvarado;  claim  filed  November  4th,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  September  5th,  1854,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  Feb- 
ruary nth,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857. 

452,  142,  S.  D.     Francisco  Maria  Alvarado,  claimant  for  Los  Penasquitos,  2 

square  leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  June  1 5tli,  1 823,  by  Luis  An- 
tonio Arguello  to  Francisco  Maria  Puiz;  claim  filed  November  4th,  1852, 
rejected  by  the  Commission  February  21st,  1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  Dis- 
trict Court  March  4th,  1858. 


453,  362,  S.  D.     Vicenta  Sepulveda,  claimant  for  La  Sierra,  4  square  leagues,  in 

Los  Angeles  county,  granted  June  15th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  V.  Sepul- 
veda; claim  filed  November  4th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  July 
10th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  February  19th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed 
March  4th,  1858. 

454,  341,  S.  D.,  267.     Maria  Antonia  Snook,  claimant  for  San  Bernardo,  4  square 

leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  2  leagues  granted  February  16th,  1842,  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado,  and  2  leagues  May  26th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico,  to  Jos6 
Francisco  Snook;  claim  filed  November  5th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 


APPENDIX.  63 

mission  June  5th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  January  6th,  1857,  and  appeal 
dismissed  March  4th,  1858;  containing  17,763.07  acres. 


y^  455,  171,  S.  D.  Victoria  Reid,  claimant  for  Hucrta  de  Quati  or  Cuati,  in  Los 
Angeles  county,  granted  October  12th,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  V. 
Reid;  claim  filed  November  5th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  August 
1st,  1854,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  October  4th,  1855,  and  appeal 
dismissed  January  3d,  1857;  containing  128.26  acres.     Patented. 

456,  354,  S.  D.,  87,  337.  Antonio  Ygnacio  Abila,  claimant  for  Sansal  Redondo, 
5  square  leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  May  20th,  1837,  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado  to  A.  Y.  Abila ;  claim  filed  November  5th,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  June  19th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  January  28th, 
1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858. 


457,  143,  S.  D.,  186.     Francisco  Sepulveda,  claimant  for  San  Vicente  and  Santa 

Monica,  4  square  leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  December  20th, 
1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  F.  Sepulveda ;  claim  filed  November  5th, 
1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  25th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court 
February  23d,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  21st,  1858. 

458,  360,  S.  D.     Casildo  Aguila/e^  al.,  claimants  for  La  Cienega  or  Paso  de  la 

Tigera,  1  square  league,  iii  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  May  16th,  1843, 
by  Manuel  Miclicltorena  to  Vicente  Sanchez ;  claim  filed  November  6th, 
1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  July  10th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court 
January  27th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  June  4th,  1857. 


459,  302,  S.  D.  Jos6  Justo  Morillo  et  al.,  claimants  for  Las  Bolsas,  7  square 
leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  in  1784,  by  Pedro  Fajes  to  Man- 
uel Nieto,  and  May  22d,  1834,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Catarina  Ruiz,  widow  of 
Manuel  Nieto ;  claim  filed  November  6th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
February  13th,  1855,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  February  17th, 
1857.     (See  No.  402.) 


460,  246,  S.  D.,  491.  Juan  Foster,  claimant  for  Rancho  de  la  Nacion,  6  square 
leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  December  11th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico 
to  J.  Foster ;  claim  filed  November  6th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
October  24th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  21st,  1857,  and  appeal 
dismissed  June  4th,  1857;  containing  26,631.94  acres. 


461,  329,  S.  D.,  562.  Juan  Foster,  claimant  for  Valle  de  San  Felipe,  3  square 
leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  May  30th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Fe- 
lipe Castillo;  claim  filed  November  6th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion May  22d,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  February  21st,  1857,  and  appeal 
dismissed  June  4th,  1857  ;  containing  9,972.08  acres. 


64  APPENDIX. 

462,  312,  S.  D.,  536.     Heirs  of  Juan  B.  Alvarado,  claimants  for  Rincon  del  Diablo, 

3  square  leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  May  18tli,  1843,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  J.  B.  Alvarado  ;  claim  filed  November  8th,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  May  22d,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  January  6th,  1857, 
and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858;  containing  12,653.77  acres. 

463,  263,  S.  D.     Louis  Roubideau,  claimant  for  Jurupa,  7  square  leagues,  in  San 

Bernardino  county,  granted  September  28th,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
Juan  Bandini ;  claim  filed  November  8th,  1 852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis 
sion  December  19th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  June  8th,  1857. 

464,  52,  S.  D.,  215.     David  W.  Alexander  et  al.,  claimants  for  Tujunga,  1^  square 

leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  December  5th,  1840,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  Pedro  Lopez  ei  a?.;  claim  filed  November  8th,  1852,  rejected 
by  the  Commission  November  4th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court 
February  28th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  23d,  1857  ;  containing 
6,660.71  acres. 

465,  50,  S.  D.     David  W,  Alexander,  claimant  for  Cahuenga,  one-fourth  square 

league,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  May  5th,  1 843,  by  Manuel  Michel- 
torena to  Jose  Miguel  Triunfo ;  claim  filed  November  8th,  1852,  rejected 
by  the  Commission  November  15th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  December 
13th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  by  stipulation  February  1857. 

466,  54,  S.  D.     Manuel  Sales  Tasion,  claimant  for  400  by  200  varas,  near  San 

Gabriel,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  April  18th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to 
M.  S.  Tasion ;  claim  filed  November  8th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
November  15th,  1853,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  Oc- 
tober 24th,  1855. 

467,  58,  S.  D.,  446.     Jose  Domingo,  claimant  for  350  by  250  varas,  near  San  Ga- 

briel, in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  April  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Felipe; 
claim  filed  November  8th,  1852,  and  confirmed  by  tlie  Commission  Novem- 
ber 22d,  1853. 

468,  47,  S.  D.,  486.     Victoria  Reid,  claimant  for  200  varas  square,  near  San  Ga- 

briel, in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  May  15th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Michel- 
torena to  Serafin  de  Jesus  ;  claim  filed  November  8th,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  November  29th,  1853,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  pros- 
ecution October  24th,  1855. 


469,  144,  S.  D.,  155.  Silvestre  de  la  Portilla,  claimant  for  Valle  de  San  Josd,  4 
square  leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  April  16th,  1836,  by  Gutier- 
rez to  S.  de  la  Portilla;  claim  filed  November  8th,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  February  21st,  1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  Feb- 
ruary 23d,  1857. 


APPENDIX.  65 

y      470,  346,  S.  D.,  559.     Bernardo  Yorba  et  al.,  heirs  of  Antonio  Yorba,  claimants 

for  Santiago  do  Santa  Ana,  11  square  leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county, 

\l-y         gi-anted  July  1st,  1810,  by  Josd  Figueroa  to  Antonio  Yorba;  claim  filed 

^^^~^//  '   November  9th,   1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  July  lOtb,   1855,  and 

appeal  dismissed  June  8th,  1857  ;  containing  62,516.57  acres. 

K  471,  251,  S.  D.,  449.  Maria  Juana  de  los  Angeles,  claimant  for  Cuca,  one-half 
square  league,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  May  7th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to 
M.  J.  de  los  Angeles;  claim  filed  November  9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  October  10th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  December  24th, 
1856. 

t^ 472,  65,  S.  D.,  241.     Eaimundo  Olivas  et  al.,  claimants  for  Sari  Miguel,  1^  square 

leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  July  6th,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Al- 
varado  to  R.  Olivas  et  al.;  claim  filed  November  9th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  November  22d,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  February  27th, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  23d,  1857  ;  containing  4,693.91  acres. 

—  473,  219,  S.  D.,  542.  Jose  Ramon  Malo,  claimant  for  Santa  Rita,  3  square 
leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  April  12th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to 
J.  R.  Malo ;  claim  filed  November  9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
October  17th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  December  24th,  1856. 

"  —  474,  294,  S.  D,,  160.  Maria  Jesus  Olivera  de  Cota  et  al.,  claimants  for  Santa 
Rosa,  3|  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  1^  leagues  granted  July 
30th,  1839,  by  Manuel  Jimeno,  and  2  leagues  November  19th,  1845,  by  Pio 
Pico,  to  Francisco  Cota;  claim  filed  November  9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  February  27th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  December  24th, 
1856. 

475,  272,  S.  D.  Tomas  Sanchez  Colima,  claimant  for  Santa  Gertrudes,  in  Santa 
Barbara  county,  granted  by  Pio  Pico  to  Antonio  Maria  Nieto ;  claim  filed 
November  9th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December  12th,.  1854, 
and  appeal  dismissed  June  8th,  1857. 

—  476,  389,  S.  D.  Jose  Ramon  Malo,  claimant  for  La  Purisima,  in  Santa  Barbara 
county,  granted  December  6th,  18.45,  by  Pio  Pico  to  J.  R.  Malo ;  claim  filed 
November  10th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December  31st,  1855, 
and  appeal  dismissed  June  8tli,  1857;  containing  14,927.62  acres. 

J  477,  248,  S.  D.     Juan  Gallardo,  claimant  for  2,000  varas  square,  in  Los  Angeles 

county,  granted  Jxily  17th,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  J.  Gallardo; 
claim  filed  November  11th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  November 
14th,  1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  January  20th,  1860. 

478,  371,  S.  D.     Maria  Rita  Baldez,  claimant  for  San  Antonio,  1  square  league,, 
E 


QQ  APPENDIX. 

in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  in  183^,  by  Juan  B.  AlvaraSoito  M.  E,.  Bal- 
dez  et  al.;  claim  filed  November  lith,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
September  25th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  June  8th,  1857. 

479,  318,  S.  D.     Manuel  Antonio  Rodriguez  de  Poli,  claimant  for  Mission  of  San 

Buenaventura,  12  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  June 
8tli,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Jos6  Arnas ;  claim  filed  November  11th,  1852, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  May  15th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court 
April  1st,  1861. 


480,  313,  S.  D.     Nasario  Dominguez,  claimant  for  one-sixth  of  San  Pedro,  in 

Los  Angeles  county,  granted  in  1822,  by  P.  V.  de  Sola  to  Cristobal  Do- 
minguez; claim  filed  November  12th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
January  2d,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  in  District  Court  by  claimant  De- 
cember 21st,  1857. 

481,  145,  S.  D.,  459.     Andres  et  al.,  claimants  for  Guajome,   1  square  league,  in 

San  Diego  county,  granted  July  19th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Andres  and 
Jose  Manuel ;  claim  filed  November  12th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion February  7th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  17th,  1855,  and 
appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857  ;  containing  2,219.41  acres. 

482,  146,  S.  D.     Emigdio  Vejar,  claimant  for  Boca  de  la  Playa,  \^  square  leagues, 

in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  May  7th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  E.  Vejar; 
claim  filed  November  12th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  March  14th, 
1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  Februai-y  1st,  1858. 

483,  147,  S.  D.  Leon  V.  Prudhomme,  claimant  for  Topanga  Malibu,  3  square 
^  leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  in  1804,  by  Jose  Joaquin  de  Arrfl- 
i         laga  to  Jose  Bartolome  Tapia;  claim  filed  Noveml)er  12th,  1852,  rejected 

*      '     by  the  Commission  March  21st,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  in  1860. 


484,  249.  S.  D.  William  Williams  et  al.,  claimants  for  Valle  de  las  Viejas,  4 
square  leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  May  1st,  \846,  by  Pio  Pico 
to  Ramon  Asuna  et  al.;  claim  filed  November  13th,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  December  26th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  pros- 
ecution Februarv  11th,  1856. 


485,  264,  S.  D.     Cave  J.  Couts,  claimant  for  La  Soledad,  1  square  league,  in  San 

Diego  county,  granted  April  13th,  1838,  by  Carlos  Antonio  Carrillo,  styl- 
ing himself  Provisional  Governor,  to  Francisco  Maria  Alvarado  ;  claim 
filed  November  13th,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commission  January  23d,  1855, 
and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  February  11th,  1856.  "** 

486,  148,  S.  D.,  499.     Juan  Moreno,  claimant  for  Santa  Rosa,  3  square  leagues,       ,^ 


APPENDIX.  67 

in  San  Diego  county,  granted  January  30th,  1.846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  J.  Moreno  ; 
claim  filed  November  13th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  4th, 
1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  January  15th,  1856. 

487,  287,  S.  D.  Antonio  Jos6  Rocha  et  al.,  claimants  for  La  Brea,  1  square 
league,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  January  6th,  1828,  by  Jos6  Antonio 
Carrillo  to  A.  J.  Rocha  ef  a/. ;  claim  filed  November  15th,  1852,  rejected 
by  the  Commission  March  6th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  August  8th, 
1860. 


488,  266,  S.  D.,  531.     Anacleto  Lestrade,  claimant  for  Canada  de  los  Coches,  400 

varas  square,  granted  August  16th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Apo- 
linaria  Lorenzana;  claim  filed  December  13th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  December  26th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  pros- 
ecution February  1st,  1858. 

489,  96,  S.  D.,  537.     Arno  Maube,  claimant  for  200  varas  square,  near  San  Ga- 

briel, in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  May  20th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Michel- 
torena to  A.  Maube ;  claim  filed  December  13th,  18S2,  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission January  17th,  1854,  and  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  March 
7th,  1860. 

490,  138,  N.  D.,  284.     Maria  Manuel  Valencia,  claimant  for  Boca  de  Canada  del 

Pinole,  3  square  leagues,  in  Contra  Costa  county,  granted  June  21st,  1842, 
by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  M.  M.  Valencia;  claim  filed  December  13th,  1852, 
rejected  by  the  Commission  August  10th,  1854,  confirmed  by  the  District 
Court  November  26th,  1854,  and  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court;  containing 
13,353.38  acres. 

491,  239,  S.  D.,  314.     Pedro  C,  Carrillo,  claimant  for  Camulos,  4  square  leagues, 

in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  October  2d,  1843,  by  Manuel  Michelto- 
rena to  Pedro  C.  Carrillo ;  claim  filed  December  13th,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  November  7th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  pros- 
ecution August  10th,  1860. 


492,  29,  S.  D.,  395.  Raimundo  Carrillo,  claimant  for  Nojoqui,  3  square  leagues, 
in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  April  27th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Michelto- 
rena to  R.  Carrillo;  claim  filed  December  13th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  October  12th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  October  3d,  1855, 
and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857  ;  containing  13,284.50  acres. 


493,  185,  N.  D.,  441.  Hilario  Sanchez,  claimant  for  Temalpais  or  Tamalpais,  2 
square  leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  November  28th,  1845,  by  Pio 
Pico  to  H.  Sanchez  ;  claim  filed  December  13th,  1852,  and  rejected  by  the 
Commission  September  26th,  1854. 


68  APPENDIX. 

'  —  494,  97,  S.  D.,  55,  163.  Crisogono  Ayala  et  al.,  claimants  for  Santa  Ana,  in 
Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  April  14th,  1837,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
Crisogono  Ayala  et  al.;  claim  filed  December  20th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  January  24th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  October  9tli,  1855, 
and  appeal  dismissed  February  3d,  1857  ;  containing  21,522.04  acres. 

/^  495,  67,  N.  D.,  200.  Joseph  P.  Thompson,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  640  acres, 
in  Napa  county,  granted  September  31st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Sal- 
vador Vallejo  ;  claim  filed  December  21st,  l85^,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion December  13th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  February  13th,  1857,  and 
appeal  dismissed  April  2d,  1857. 

—  496,  209,  N.  D.     Jose  Maria  Fuentes,  claimant  for  Potrero,  11  square  leagues,  in 

Santa  Clara  county,  granted  June  12th,  1843,  by  Manuel  ~Micheltorena  to 
J.  M.  Fuentes;  claim  filed  December  21st,  1852,  rejected  by  the  Commis- 
sion November  21st,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  August  24th,  1857,  and 
decree  affirmed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  in  22  Howard,  443. 

497,  183,  N.  D.,  27.  Heirs  of  Juan  Reid,  claimants  for  Corte  de  Madera  del  Pre- 
sidio, 1  square  league,  in  Marin  county,  granted  October  2d,  1834,  by  Jose 
Figueroa  to  Juan  Reid;  claim  filed  December  23d,  1852,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  June  13th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  14th,  1856,  and 
appeal  dismissed  Aj)ril  2d,  1857  ;  containing  4,460.24  acres. 

^ —  498,  236,  S.  D.,  307.  Pedro  C.  Carrillo,  claimant  for  Los  Alamos  y  Agua  Cali- 
ente,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  October  2d,  1843-^by  Manuel  Michel- 
torena  to  P.  C.  Carrillo;  claim  filed  December  24th,  1852,  rejected  by  the 

*  Commission  November  7th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  pros- 

ecution August  10th,  1860. 

—  499,  253,  N.  D.     John  Hendley  e?  a/.,  claimants  for  Llano  de  Santa  Rosa,  1  square 

league,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  March  20th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Michelto- 
rena  to  Joaquin  Carrillo  ;  claim  filed  December  24th,  1852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  January  23d,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prose- 
cution April  21st,  1856. 

500,  78,  N.  D.,  200.  Lilburn  W.  Boggs,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  680  acres,  in 
Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  ^838;,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Sal- 
vador Vallejo ;  claim  filed  December  28th,  1852,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion December  13th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  April  14tli,  1856,  and  appeal 
dismissed  April  2d,  1857. 

■'"'  501,  149,  S.  D.,  253.  Joaquin  Estrada,  claimant  for  Santa  Margarita,  4  square 
leagues,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  coimty,  granted  September  28th,  1841,  by 
Manuel  Jimeno  to  J.  Estrada ;  claim  filed  December  28th,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  April  4th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  October  3d,  1855, 


APPENDIX.  69 

and  appeal  dismissed  Fcbniaiy  5th,    1857;    containing   17,734.94  acres. 
Patented. 


502,  101,  S.  D.  Teodoro  Gonzales,  claimant  for  Rincon  de  la  Puenta  del  Monte, 
7  square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  September  20th,  183G,  by 
Gutierrez  to  T.  Gonzales;  claim  filed  December  28th,  1852,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  February  7th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  September  21st, 
-1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857;  containing  15,218.62 
acres. 

^  •  503,  363,  N.  D.,  293.     Maria  L.  B.  Berreyesa  et  ah,  claimants  for  San  Vincente,  1 

square  league,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  August  20th, J842,  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado  to  Jose  R,  Berreyesa;  claim  filed  December  30th,  1852,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  July  3d,  1855,  by  tli€  District  Court  March  13th, 
1857,  and  decree  affirmed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  in  23  Howard,  499  ; 
containing  4,438.36  acres. 


504,  320,  S.  D.  Jose  Miguel  Gomez,  claimant  for  San  Simeon,  1  square  league, 
in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  December  1st,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alva- 
rado to  Jose  Ramon  Estrada;  claim  filed  December~3rst,  1852,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  May  8th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  January  12th, 
1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858  ;  containing  4,468.81  acres. 

505,27,  S.  D.,  248.  Feliciano Soberanes,  claimant  for  San  Lorenzo,  5  square 
leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  August  9th,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alva- 
rado to  F.  Soberanes;  claim  filed  December  31st,'T852,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  October  25th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  September 
24th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857 ;  containing  21,884.38 
acres. 


^  "*  506,  181,  N.  D.  Agustin  Bernal,  claimant  for  Santa  Teresa,  1  square  league,  in 
Santa  Clara  county,  granted  July  11th,  1834^  by  Jose  Fi^ueroa  to  Joaquin 
Bernal;  claim  filed  January  3d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  Sep- 
tember 5th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  August  11th,  1856,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed November  2d,  1858 ;  containing  4,460.03  acres. 

^  — •  507,  8,  N.  D.  H.  F.  Teschemacher,  claimant  for  Lup  Yomi,  14  square  leagues, 
in  Napa  county,  granted  September  5tli,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena 
to  Salvador  Vallejo  etal.;  claim  filed  January  5th,  1853,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  December  13th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  June 
27th,  1855,  decree  reversed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  and  case  remanded 
for  further  evidence,  22  Howard,  392. 

508,  256,  S.  D.,  54,  Heirs  of  Domingo  Carrillo,  claimant  for  one-half  of  Las 
Virgenes,  4  square  leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  October  1st, 
1834,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  D.  Carrillo  et  al. ;  claim  filed  January  6th,  1853, 


TO  APPENDIX. 

rejected  by  the  Commission  November  7th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed 
for  failure  of  prosecution  May  7th,  1860. 

—  509,  330,  N.  D.,  341.  Samuel  G.  Eeed  et  al.,  claimants  for  Eancho  del  Puerto,  3 
square  leagues,  in  Stanislaus  county,  granted  January  20th,  1844,  by  Man- 
uel Micheltorena  to  Mariano  Hernandez  et  al. ;  claim  filed  January  7th, 
1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  May  22d,  1855,  by  the  District  Court 
May  6th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  27th,  1857 ;  containing  13.340.39 
acres. 


-^  510,  168,  N.  D.,  200.  ITladislao  Yallejo,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  600  yards 
square,  in  Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alva- 
rado  to  Salvador  Vallejo;  claim  filed  January  11th,  1853,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  August  22d,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed^ for  failure  of  prosecu- 
tion April  1st,  1856. 

511,349,  N.  D.  Henry  Cambuston,  claimant  for  11  square  leagues,  in  Butte 
county,  granted  May  23d,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  H.  Cambuston;  claim  filed 
January  14th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  July  10th,  1855,  by  the 
District  Court  March  3d,  1856,  decree  reversed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court 
and  case  remanded  for  further  hearing,  20  Howard,  59.  Claim  rejected  by 
the  District  Court  November  9th,  1859. 

512,  227,  S.  D.     Guadalupe  Ortega  de  Chapman  et  al.,  claimants  for  San  Pedro, 

1  square  league,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  in  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Al- 
varado  to  Jose  Chapman;  claim  filed  January  15th,  1853,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  November  21st,  1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court 
April  Uth,  1861. 

513,  292,  S.  D.  Francisco  Estevan  Quintana,  claimant  for  La  Vena,  1  square 
league,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  January  14t]i,  1842,  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado  to  F.  E.  Quintana;  claim  filed  January  15th,  1853,  rejected 
by  the  Commission  February  27th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure 
of  prosecution  December  18th,  1856. 

_^_^  514,  143,  N.  D.  James  Enright,  claimant  for  2,000  varas  square,  in  Santa  Clara 
county,  granted  January  6th,  1845,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Francisco 
Garcia;  claim  filed  January  l7th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  Au- 
gust 8th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  April  26th,  1858,  and  by  the  U.  S. 
Supreme  Court;  containing  710.14  acres. 

515,  394,  N.  D.  Joseph  C.  Palmer  et  al.,  claimants  for  Punta  de  Lobos,  2  square 
leagues,  in  San  Francisco  county,  granted  June  25th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to 
Benito  Diaz;  claim  filed  January  17th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
August  Uth,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  December  5th,  1857,  and  judg- 
ment afiirmed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  with  costs,  24  Howard,  125. 


/ 


APPENDIX.  71 

— —  516,  220,  N.  D.,  454.  Barcelia  Bcnial,  claimant  for  Embarcadcro  cle  Santa  Clara, 
1,000  varas  square,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  June  18th,  1845,  by  Pio 
Pico  to  B.  Bcrnal;  claim  filed  January  17th,  1853,  confirmed  liy^ic  Com- 
mission December  12tli,  1854,  and  by  the  33istrict  Court  February  23d,  1857. 

517,  150,   S.  D.,  301.     Nicholas  A.  Den,   claimant  for  Dos  Pueblos,  3  square 

leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  April  18th,  1842,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  N.  A.  Den;  claim  filed  January  18th,  185.3,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  March  14th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  28th,  1855, 
and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857  ;  containing  15,535.33  acres. 

518,  151,  S.  D.  David  Spence,  claimant  for  Llano  de  Buenavista,  2  square 
leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  in  1823,  by  Luis  Antonio  Ai-guello  to 
Jose  Mariano  Estrada;  claim  filed  January  18th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  March  14th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  7th,  1856, 
and  appeal  dismissed  February  23d,  1857  ;  containing  8,446.23  acres.  Pat- 
ented. 


.- —  519,  152,  S.  D.,  261.  Jos63  Dolores  Ortega,  claimant  for  Canada  del  Corral,  2 
square  leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  November  5th,  1841,  by 
Manuel  Jimeno  to  J.  D.  Ortega;  claim  filed  January  19th,  1853,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  February  21st,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February 
1st,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  23d,  1857;  containing  8,875.76 
acres. 

520,  252,  S.  D.,  570.     Daniel  Hill,  claimant  for  La  Goleta,  1  square  league,  in 

Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  June  10th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  D.  Hill; 
claim  filed  January  19th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December 
26th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  8th,  1858,  and  appeal  dismissed 
May  15th,  1861. 

-^  521,  153,  S.  D.,  520.  Manuel  Arguisola,  claimant  for  Temascal,  3  square  leagues, 
in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  March  17th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Michelto- 
rena  to  Francisco  Lopez  et  al. ;  claim  filed  January  T9th,  1853,  rejected  by 
the  Commission  April  4th,  1853,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  Feb- 
ruary 20th,  1857. 

522,  154,  S.  D.,  9.     Antonio  Maria  Ortega  et  al.,  claimants  for  Nuestra  Senora 

del  Refugio,  6  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  August 
1st,  1834j  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  A.  M.  Ortega  ei  a?. ;  claim  filed  January 
*^  19th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  March  14th,  1854,  by  the  District 
Court  December  29th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858;  con- 
taining 26,529.30  acres. 

523,  240,  N.  D.     Hicks  and  Martin,  claimants  for  Rancho  de  los  Cosumnes,  1 

square  league,  in  Sacramento  county,  granted  December  22d,  1844,  by 


72  APPENDIX. 

Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Heleuo  ;  claim  filed  Ja^nuary  21  st,  1853,  and  rejected 
by  the  Commission  January  23d,  1855. 

524,  300,  N.  D.,  299.  Barbara  Soto  et  at,  claimants  for  San  Lorenzo,  1^  square 
leagues,  in  Alameda.county,  granted  October  10th,  1842,  by  Manuel  Mich- 
eltorena, and  January  20th,  1844,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado,  to  Francisco  Soto; 
claim  filed  January  22d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  24th, 
1855,  by  the  District  Court  April  23d,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  April 
29th,  1857;  containing  6,686.33  acres. 


525,  418,  N.  D.  Bethuel  Phelps,  claimant  for  Punta  Keyes,  8  square  leagues,  in 
Marin  county,  granted  March  l7th,  1836,  by  Nicolas  Gutierrez  to  James 
Richard  Berry;  claim  filed  January  22d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion August  7th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  December  22d,  1857,  and  ap- 
peal dismissed  December  22d,  1857. 


526,  348,  S.  D.  Peliciano  Soberanes,  claimant  for  Mission  de  la  Soledad,  2  square 
miles,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  January  4th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  P. 
Soberanes;  claim  filed  January  22d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
July  17th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  June  8th,  1857;  containing  8,899.82 
acres. 


-527,  201,  S.  D.  James  Blair  ef  at.,  claimants  for  Salsipuedes,  8  square  leagues, 
in  Santa  Cruz  county,  2  square  leagues  granted  with  conditions  November 
4th,  1834,  by  Jose  Eigueroa,  and  final  title  to  8  square  leagues  March  1st, 
1840,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado,  to  Manuel  Jimeno  Casarin ;  claim  filed  January 
27th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  May  2d,  1854,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed October  8th,  1857  ;  containing  27,662.57  acres.     Patented. 


>^  528,  268,  S.  D.,  150.  Luis  T.  Burton  et  ah,  claimants  for  two-thirds  of  Jesus 
Maria,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  April  8th,  1837,  by  Juan  B.  Al- 
varado to  Lucas  Olivera  et  a/. /.claim  filed  January  27th,  1853,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  December  19th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  February 
1st,  1858  ;  containing  42,184.93  acres. 


•-^29,  155,  S.  D.,  260.  James  McKinlay,  claimant  for  Moro  y  Cayucos,  2  square 
leagues,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  1  square  league  granted  April  27th, 
1842,  to  Martin  Olivera,  and  the  other  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Vicente 
Feliz;  claim  filed  January  28th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April 
4th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  24th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed 
March  4th,  1858;  containing  8,845.49  acres. 


530,  34,  S.  D.,  384.  James  McKinlay,  claimant  for  San  Lucas,  2  square  leagues, 
in  Monterey  county,  granted  May  9th,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to'  Rafael 
Estrada;  claim  filed  January  28th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  De- 


APPENDIX.  73 

cember  13th,  1853,  confirmed  by  tlic  District  Court  February  21st,  1856, 
and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857  ;  containing  3,590.25  acres. 

531,  270,  S.  T>.     Fermina  Espinoza  de  Perez  and  Domingo  Perez,  claimants  for 

Los  Gatos  or  Santa  Rita,  1  squai-e  league,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  in 
y^'y  r826,  and  September  3d,  1837,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Jose  Trinidad  Es- 

^       '  pinoza  ;  claim  filed  January  29th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  Jan- 

uary 23d,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  January  23d,  1857,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed March  4th,  1858;  containing  4,424.46  acres. 

532,  244,  S.  D.,  191.     Eusebio  Boronda,  claimant  for  Rinconada  del  Sanjon,  1^ 

square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  February  1st,  1840,  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado  to  E.  Boronda;  claim  filed  January  29th,  1853,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  October  31st,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  October  16th, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  5th,  1857  ;  containing  2,229.70  acres. 
Patented, 

533,  240,  S.  D.,  175.     Jos6  Manuel  Boronda  et  ah,  claimants  for  Los  Laureles  H 

square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  September  20th,  1839,  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado  to  Jose  M.  Boronda  and  Vicente  Bias  Martinez ;  claim  filed 
January  29th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  October  31st,  1854,  by 
the  District  Court  January  7th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  5th, 
1857  ;  containing  6,624.99  acres. 

—  534,  156,  S.  D.  Joaquin  Carrillo  et  al.,  claimants  for  San  Carlos  de  Jonata,  6 
square  leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  September  24th,  1845,  by 
Pio  Pico  to  J.  Carrillo  et  al. ;  claim  filed  January  29th,  1853,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  January  31st,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  February 
7th,  1857;  containing  26,631.31  acres. 

535,  215^  S.  D.,  16.  Rafael  Estrada,  claimant  for  Rincon  de  las  Salinas,  one-half 
square  league,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  December  2d,  1833,  by  Jose 
Figueroa  to  Cristina  Delgado  ;  claim  filed  January  29th,  1853,  confirmed 
by  the  ComTnission  September  26th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January 
7th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  5tli,  1857;  containing  2,220.02 
acres.     Patented. 


536,  349,  S.  D.,  326.  Jose  Maria  Covarrubias,  claimant  for  Castac,  5  square 
leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  November  22d,  1 843,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  J.  M.  Covarrubias;  claim  filed  January  29th,  1853,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  July  10th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  January 
21st,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  6th,  1858. 


537,  230,  S.  D.,  75.  Juana  Briones  de  Lugo  et  al.,  claimants  for  Paraje  de  San- 
chez, 1 1  square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  June  8th,  1 8.39,  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Francisco  Lugo ;  claim  filed  January  29th,  1853,  con- 


74  APPENDIX. 

firmed  by  the  Commission  November  7th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  Oc- 
tober 16th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  5th,  1857;  containing 
6,584.32  acres. 

538,  369,  S.  D.     Jose  Maria  Covarrubias  et  al.,  claimants  for  Mission  of  Santa 

Inez,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  June  15th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  J. 
M.  Covarrubias  et  al. ;  claim  filed  January  29th,  1853,  and  rejected  by  the 
Commission  September  11th,  1855. 

539,  234,  S.  D.,  135.     Maria  del  Espiritu  Santo  Carrillo,  claimant  for  Loma  del 

Espiritu  Santo,  described  by  boundaries,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  April 
15th,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Maria  del  Espiritu  Santo  Carrillo; 
claim  filed  January  29th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  November  14th, 
1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  February  11th,  1856. 

540,  222,  S.  D.,  121.     Heirs  of  Felipe  Vasquez,  claimants  for  Chamisal,  1  square 

league,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  November  17th,  1835,  by  Jos^  Castro 
to  F.  Vasquez;  claim  filed  January  31st,  1853,  and  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission October  24th,  1854. 


541,  189,  N.  D.;  174,  S.  D.,   (sent  to  Northern  District).     Gregorio  Briones, 

claimant  for  Las  Baulines,  2  square  leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  Feb- 
ruary 11th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  G.  Briones;  claim  filed  January  31st, 
1853,  confirriied  by  the  Commission  May  15th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court 
January  19th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  April  2d,  1857  ;  containing 
8,911.34  acres. 

542,  88,  N.  D.     Encarnacion  Buelna  and  heirs  of  Maria  Concepcion  V.  de  Rod- 

riguez, claimants  for  part  of  San  Gregorio,  3  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Cruz 
county,  granted  May  2d,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Antonino  Buelna; 
claim  filed  February  1st,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  December  27th, 
1853,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  October  29th,  1855,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed July  24th,  1857  ;  containing  13,344.15  acres.     Patented. 

543,  242,  S.  D.     Mayor  and  Common  Council  of  Santa  Barbara,  claimants  for 

8|-  square  leagues,  granted,  in  1782,  to  the  Pueblo  of  Santa  Barbara;  claim 
filed  February  1st,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  August  1st,  1854,  and 
confirmed  by  the  District  Court  March  6th,  1861. 

544,  221,    S.   D,,  275.     Mariano   Soberanes,   claimant  for  Los   Ojitos,  2  square 

leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  April  5th,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvai'ado 
to  M.  Soberanes;  claim  filed  February  1st,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission September  26th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  7th,  1856,  and 
appeal  dismissed  February  5th,  1857  ;  containing  8,900.17  acres. 

545,  181,  S.  D.,  348.     Julian  Ursua,  claimant  for  La  Panocha  de  San  Juan,  5 


APPENDIX.  75 

square  leao:iics,  in  San  Joaquin  county,  granted  February  l7th,  1844,  by 
Manuel  Miclieltorena  to  J.  Ursua ;  claim  filed  February  2d,  1853,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  May  2d,  1854,  and  by  tbe  District  Court  December 
17th,  1856. 


546,  373,  S.  D.,  198.  Jos6  Castro,  claimant  for  San  Jose  y  Sur  Chiquita,  2 
square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  April  IGtli,  1839,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  Marcelino  Escobar ;  claim  filed  February  2d,  1853,  and  rejected 
by  the  Commission  August  28th,  1855. 


547,  368,  S.  D.  Jose  Maria  Covarmbias,  claimant  for  Isla  de  Santa  Catalina, 
described  by  boundaries,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  July  4th,  1846,  by 
Pio  Pico  to  Tomas  M.  Bobbins  ;  claim  filed  February  3d,  1 853,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  September  25th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  March 

1st,  1858. 


548,  424,  N.  D.  Jose  Y.  Limantour,  claimant  for  4  square  leagues,  in  San  Fran- 
cisco county,  part  of  the  city,  supposed  to  extend  south  of  Calfornia  street, 
granted  February  27th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Michel torena  to  J.  Y.  Limantour; 
claim  filed  February  3d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  22d, 
1856,  and  rejected  by  the  District  Court  October  19th,  1858. 


549,  429,  N.  D.     Jose  Y.  Limantour,  claimant  for  the  Islands  of  Farrallones,  Al- 

catraz  and  Yerba  Buena,  and  a  tract  of  1  square  league  in  Marin .  county, 
opposite  the  Island  of  Los  Angeles,  known  as  Punta  del  Tiburon,  gran^g^ 
December  16th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  J.  Y.  Limitntour;  claim 
filed  February  3d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  February  12th,  1856, 
and  rejected  by  the  District  Court  November  19th,  1858. 

550,  328,  S.  D.,  204.     Jolm  P.  Davison,  claimant  for  Santa  Paula  y  Saticoy,  4 

square  leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  April  1st,  1843,  by  Man- 
uel Micheltorena  to  Manuel  Jimeno  Casarin;  claim  filed  February  3d,  1853, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  May  22d,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  March 
4th,  1858;  containing  17,733.33  acres. 


551,  223,  S.  D.,  238.     Mariano  Soberanes  et  al.,  claimants  for  San  Bernardo,  3 

square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  June  16th,  1841,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  M.  Soberanes  et  al. ;  claim  filed  February  5th,  1853,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  November  7th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January 
14th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  5th,  1857  ;  containing  13,345.65 
acres. 

552,  210,  S.  D.,  292.     Heirs  of  Joaquin  Soto,  claimants  for  El  Piojo,  3  square 

leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  August  20th,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alva- 
rado to  Joaquin  Soto ;  claim  filed  February  5th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the 


76  APPENDIX. 

Commission  September  26th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  19th, 
1857,  and  ai^peal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858  ;  containing  13,329.28  acres. 

-553,  284,  S.  D.,  209.  Antonio  Olivera,  claimant  for  Casmalia,  2  square  leagues, 
in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  September  12th,  f840^  by  Juan  B.  Alva- 
rado  to  A.  Olivera;  claim  filed  February  5th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission March  6th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  1st,  1858;  con- 
taining "8, 84 1.21  acres. 

554,  356,  S.  D.     Andrew  Eandall  and  Fletcher  M.  Haight,  claimants  for  Canada 

de  la  Segunda,  1  square  league,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  April  4th, 
J_839,  by  Jose  Castro  to  Lazaro  Soto ;  claim  filed  February  5th,  1853,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  August  14th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  Febru- 
ary 5th,  1858,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  8th,  1858 ;  containing  4,366.80 
acres.     Patented. 

555,  253,  S.  D.,  316.     Andrew  Eandall,   claimant  for  San  Lorenzo,   5  square 

leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  November  16th,  1842,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  Francisco  Rico ;  claim  filed  February  5th,  l^Bs,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  December  12th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  12th, 
1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858  ;  containing  22,264.47  acres. 

556,  344,  S.  D.,  289.     Francisco  Dominguez  et  ah,  claimants  for  San  Emidio,  4 

square  leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  July  14th,  1842,  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado  to  Jose  Antonio  Dominguez;  claim  filed  February  5th,  1853, 
rejected  by  the  Commission  December  26th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  June 
8th,  1^57;  containing  17,709.79  acres. 

557,  190,  S.  D.     Jacob  P.  Leese,  claimant  for  Rancho  de  Sausal,  2  square  leagues, 

in  Monterey  county,  granted  August  2d,  1834,  and  August  10th,  1845,  by 
Jose  Figueroa  to  Jose  Tiburcio  Castro;  claim  filed  February  5th,  1853, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  August  15th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  De- 
cember 18th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858;  containing 
10,241.88  acres.     Patented. 

558,  346,  N.  D.     Charles  White,  claimant  for  Arroyo  de  San  Antonio,  in  So- 

noma county,  granted  August  10th,  1840,  by  Juan  B,  Alvarado  to  Antonio 
Ortega ;  claim  filed  February  7th,  18.53,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  June 
26th,  1855,  by  tlie  District  Court  August  17th,  1857,  decree  reversed  by  the 
U.  S.  Supreme  Court,  and  record  remitted  for  further  proceedings,  23  How- 
ard, 249. 

559,  409,  N.  D.     W.  D.  M.  Howard,  claimant  for  San  Mateo,  2  square  leagues, 

in  San  Mateo  county,  granted  May  5th  or  6th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Caye- 
tano  Arenas  ;  claim  filed  February  7th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
September  18th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  April  6th,  1857;  containing 
6,438.80  acres.     Patented. 


APPENDIX.  77 

560,  352,  S.  D.  Patrick  Breen,  claimant  for  1,500  varas  square,  in  Monterey 
county,  granted  April  13th,  1846^  by  Pio  Pico  to  Jose  Castro;  claim  filed 
February  7th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  June  26th,  1855,  and 
appeal  dismissed  February  1st,  1858  ;  containing  401.25  acres. 


561,  281,  S.  D.,  525.  Michael  White,  claimant  for  Muscupiabe,  1  square  league, 
in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  April  29th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena 
to  M.  White  ;  claim  filed  February  8th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
March  6th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  June  8th,  1857. 


562,  68,  S.  D.,  276.  James  Watson,  claimant  for  San  Benito,  1^  square  leagues, 
in  Monterey  county,  granted  April  5th,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Fran- 
cisco Garcia ;  claim  filed  February  9th,  tSM,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
January  17th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  23d,  1857,  and  appeal 
dismissed  March  4th,  1857;  containing  6,671.08  acres. 


563,  380,  S.  D.     L.  E.  Pogue  et  ah,  claimants  for  Point  Pinos,  2  square  leagues, 

in  Monterey  county,  granted  May  24th,  1833,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Jose 
Maria  Armenta;  claim  filed  February  9th,  1853,  and  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission September  Ilth,  1855. 

564,  157,  S.  D.,  151.     John  C.  Gore,  claimant  for  Pescadero,  1  square  league,  in 

Monterey  county,  granted  March  3d,  1836,  by  Mcolas  Gutierrez  to  Fabian 
Barretto  ;  claim  filed  February  9th,  185X~rejected  by  the  Commission  Feb- 
ruary 28th,  1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  January  18th,  1856  ; 
containing  1,695.04  acres. 

565,  361,  S.  D.     PamonaButron  et  al.,  claimants  for  Natividad,  2  square  leagues, 

in  Monterey  county,  granted  November  16th,  1837,  by  JuanB.  Alvarado  to 
•  M.  Butron  and  N.  Alviso  ;  claim  filed  February'9th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  July  10th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  February  23d,   1857, 
and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858;  containing  8,642.21  acres. 


-566,  100,  S.  D.,  133,  Guadalupe  Castro,  claimant  for  San  Andres,  2  square 
leagues,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  November  27th,  1 833,  by  Jose  Fig- 
ueroa to  Joaquin  Castro;  claim  filed  February  9th,  1 853,"confirmed  by  the 
Commission  February  7th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  21st,  1857, 
and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858 ;  containing  8,911.53  acres. 

567,  288,  S.  D.,  457.  W.  S.  Johnson  et  al.,  claimants  for  Pleyto,  3  square  leagues, 
in  Monterey  county,  granted  July  18th,  \845>  by  Pio  Pico  to  Antonio 
Chaves ;  claim  filed  February  9th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  March 
6th,  1855,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  February  7th,  1857. 

•*>  568,  33,2,  N.  D,,  514.     Antonio  Eodriguez,  claimant  for  San  Vicente,  2  square 
leagues,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  April  16th,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alva- 


78  APPENDIX. 

rado  to  A.  Eodriguez ;  claim  filed  Eebruaiy  9th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission May  8th,  1855,  appeal  dismissed  and  cause  stricken  from  the  docket 
February  23d,  1857. 

"569,  278,  N.  D.;  393,  S.  D.,  (sent  to  the  Southern  District  March  9th,  1857). 
Vicente  Gomez,  claimant  for  Panoche  Grande,  4  square  leagues,  in  San 
Joaquin  county,  granted  in  |,g44^  by*Manuel  Micheltorena  to  V.  Gomez ; 
claim  filed  February  9th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  March  6th, 
1855,  confirmed  by  the  Southern  District  Court  June  5th,  1859.  In  this 
case,  motion  was  made  to  review  the  decree.  Pending  the  motion,  the  case 
was  taken  up  on  appeal  to  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court,  where  the  cause  was 
docketed  and  dismissed.  In  23  Howard,  326,  the  order  of  the  Supreme 
Court  docketing  and  dismissing  cause  was  vacated  and  the  mandate  recalled. 
Case  reopened  in  District  Court  March  21st,  1861,  and  is  at  issue. 

570,  158,  S.  D.,  13.     Heirs  of  Gabriel  Espinoza  et  al.,  claimants  for  Salinas,  1 

square  league,  granted  April  15th,  1836^  by  Nicolas  Gutierrez  to  G.  Espi- 
noza; claim  filed  February  9th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April 
4th,  1854,  and  confirmed  hj  the  District  Court  February  7th,  1857. 

571,  306,  S.  D.,  224.     Henry  Cocks,  claimant  for  San  Bernabe,  3  square  leagues, 

in  Monterey  county,  1  square  league  granted  March  10th,  1841,  to  Jesus  Mo- 
lina, and  2  square  leagues  granted  January  8tli,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado 
to  Petronillo  Rios  ;  claim  filed  February  9th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Com. 
mission  March  20th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  June  8th,  1857  ;  containing 
13,296.98  acres. 

572,  298,  S.  D.     Henry  Cocks,  claimant  for  one-fourth  square  league,  in  Monterey 

county,  granted  July  30th,  1840,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Esteben  Espinoza ; 
claim  filed  February  9th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  March  20th, 
1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  June  8th,  1857;  containing  1,106.03  acres. 

573,  159,  S.  D.,  193.     James  Meadows,  claimant  for  land  in  Monterey  county, 

granted  January  27th,  1840,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Antonio  Romero; 
claim  filed  February  10th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  March  14th, 
1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  30tli,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed 
January  21st,  1858  ;  containing  4,591.71  acres. 

574,  342,  S.  D.     Julian  Workman  et  al.,  claimants  for  Mission  of  San  Gabriel,  in 

Los  Angeles  county,  granted  June  8th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  J.  Workman 
and  P.  Hugo  Reid;  claim  filed  February  llth,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission June  26th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution 
December  20th,  1856. 

575,  176,  S.  D.     John  F.  Jones  et  al.,  claimants  for  Rio  de  las  Animas,  6  square 

leagues,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  May  12th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to 


APPENDIX.  79 

Leonardo  Cota  and  Julian  Chaves;  claim  filed  February  11th,  1853,  rejected 
by  the  Commission  August  1st,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of 
prosecution  October  24:th,  1855. 

576,  165,  S.  D.,  546.  Agustin  Olvcra,  claimant  for  La  Cienega,  20  square  leagues, 
in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  April  21st,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  A.  Olvera 
and  Narciso  Botello;  claim  filed  February  11th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission August  1st,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  January  26th,  1860. 

¥^  ^11,  249,  N.  D.  B.  McCombs,  claimant  for  part  of  Salvador's  Rancho,  140  acres, 
in  Napa  county,  granted  January  1st,  1839,  by  Jvian  B.  Alvarado  to  Salvador 
Vallejo ;  claim  filed  February  llth,'~1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
December  26th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  February  23d,  1857. 

^  578,  231,  N.  D.  Joel  P.  Walker,  claimant  for  part  of  Entre  Napa,  60  acres,  in 
Napa  county,  granted  May  9th,  1836,  by  Mariano  Chico  to  Nicolas  Higuera ; 
claim  filed  February  llth,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December 
26th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  23d,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed 
December  23d,  1857. 

f/'  579,  212,  N.  D.  Johnson  Ilorrel,  claimant  for  part  of  Salvador's  Rancho,  240  acres 
in  Napa  county,  granted  January  1st,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Salvador 
Vallejo;  claim  filed  February  llth,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
October  17th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed June  13th,  1857. 

^''  580,  171,  N.  D.  Peter  D.  Bailey,  claimant  for  part  of  Entre  Napa,  in  Napa 
county,  granted  May  9th,  1836,  by  Mariano  Chico  to  Nicolas  Higuera; 
claim  filed  February  llth,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  September 
5th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  23d,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed 
December  23d,  1855. 

V  581,  176,  N.  D.  Joseph  Mount  et  al.,  claimants  for  part  of  Entre  Napa,  in  Napa 
coimty,  granted  May  9t]i,  1836,  by  Mariano  Chico  to  Nicolas  Higuera; 
claim  filed  February  llth,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  September 
5th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  February  13th,  1857. 

P^  582,  241,  N.  D.  John  Love,  claimant  for  part  of  Salvador's  Eancho,  100  acres,  in 
Napa  county,  granted  January  1st,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Salvador 
Vallejo  ;  claim  filed  February  llth,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  De- 
cember 26th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  February  23d,  1857. 

^  583,  261,  N.  D.  William  Keely,  claimant  for  part  of  Salvador's  Rancho,  40  acres,  in 
Napa  county,  granted  January  1st,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Salvador 
Vallejo;  claim  filed  February  llth,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
January  9tli,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  February  23d,  1857. 


80  APPENDIX. 

584,  222,  IST.  D.,  510.  Johnson  Horrel  et  ah,  claimants  for  Eincon  de  Musulacon, 
2  square  leagues,  in  Mendocino  and  Sonoma  counties,  "granted  May  2d, 
1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Francisco  Berreyesa;  claim  filed  Pebruary  11th,  1853, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  December  12th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court 
January  14th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  April  2d,  1857;  containing 
8,866.88  acres. 


585,  172,  N.  D.  Joseph  Green,  claimant  for  part  of  Entre  Napa,  in  Napa  county, 
granted  May  9th,  1836,  by  Mariano  Chico  to  Nicolas  Higuera ;  claim  filed 
February  11th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  September  19th,  1854, 
and  by  the  District  Court  February  13th,  1857. 

Y  586,  242,  N.  D.  John  Patchen^  claimant  for  part  of  Entre  Napa,  in  Napa  county, 
granted  May  9th,  1836,  by  Mariano  Chico  to  Nicolas  Higuera;  claim  filed 
February  11th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  9th,  1855,  and 
by  the  District  Court  February  23d,  1857. 

587,  244,  N.  D.  Marta  Frias  de  Higuera,  claimant  for  part  of  Entre  Napa,  in 
Napa  county,  granted  May  8th,  18^,  by  Mariano  Chico  to  Nicolas  Higuera ; 
claim  filed  February  11th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  9th, 
1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  June  10th,  1858. 

,—  .588,  76,  S.  D.,  455.  Pedro  Estrada,  claimant  for  La  Asuncion,  in  San  Luis 
Obispo  county,  granted  June  19th,  1845^  by  Pio  Pico  to  P.  Estrada;  claim 
filed  February  12th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  24th, 
1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  25th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  Feb- 
ruary 24th,  1857  ;  containing  39,224.81  acres. 

589,  390,  S.  D.     President  and  Trustees  of  thfe  City  of  San  Diego,  claimants  for 
•  -.         land  granted,  in  1769,  to  the  Pueblo  of  San  Diego;  claim  filed  February 
14th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  27th,  1856,  and  appeal 
dismissed  June  8th,  1857  ;  containing  48,556.69  acres. 


.  y  590,  276,  N.  D.,  249.  Joaquin  Moraga,  claimant  for  Laguna  de  los  Palos  Colo- 
rados,  3  square  leagues,  in  Contra  Costa  county,  granted  August  10th,  1841, 
by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  J.  Moraga  and  Juan  Bernal;  claim  filed  February 
15th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  23d,  1855,  by  the  Dis- 
trict Court  March  24th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  April  8th,  1856;  con- 
taining 13,318.13  acres. 

_^  591,  285,  S.  D.,  357.  Nicolas  Dodero,  claimant  for  Tres  Ojos  .de  Agua,  1,300 
varas  square,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  March  18th,  1844,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorcna  to  N.  Dodero;  claim  filed  February  15th,  1853,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  February  20th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  January  18th, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857  ;  containing  176  acres. 


APPENDIX.  81 

^  ■  592,  307,  S.  D.,  105.  Juan  Hames  et  ah,  claimants  for  Arroyo  del  Rodeo,  one  by 
one-fourth  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  August  2d,  1834, 
by  Jos6  Figueroa  to  Francisco  Rodriguez ;  claim  filed  February  1 5th,  1 853, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  March  27th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court 
March  5th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857  ;  containing 
1,473.07  acres. 

/^  — -  593,  343,  N.  D.  Martina  Castro,  claimant  for  Shoquel,  1  square  league,  in  Santa 
Cruz  county,  granted  May  17th,  1834,  by  Jose  Figueroa,  and  surplus  lands, 
known  as  Palo  de  la  Yesca,  described  by  boundaries,  granted  January  7th, 
1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena,  to  M.  Castro ;  claim  filed  February  16th, 
1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  June  26th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed 
March  20th,  1857  ;  containing  32,702.41  acres.     Patented. 

^  -n  594,  167,  N.  D.,  179.  Tiburcio  Vasquez,  claimant  for  Corral  de  Tierra,  1  square 
league,  in  San  Mateo  county,  granted  October  5th,  1839,  by  Manuel  Jimeno 
to  T.  Vasquez ;  claim  filed  February  1 7th,  1 853,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission August  15th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  April  18th,  1859,  and  ap- 
peal dismissed  June  29th,  1859  ;  containing  4,436.18  acres. 

595,  247,  S.  D,,  69.     Jos6  Abrego,  claimant  for  San  Francisquito,  2  square  leagues, 

in  Monterey  county,  granted  November  9th,  1835,  by  Jose  Castro  to  Cata- 
lina  Manzaneli  de  Munras;  claim  filed  February  17th,  1853,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  October  17th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  19th, 
1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  21st,  1858;  containing  8,813.50  acres. 

596,  220,  S.  D.,  296.     Angel  Castro  et  al.,  claimants  for  Los  Paicines  or  Cienega 

de  los  Paicines,  2  square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  October  5th, 
1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Angel  Castro;  claim  filed  February  17th, 
1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  October  17th,  1854,  by  the  District 
Court  January  28th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  June  4th,  1857  ;  containing 
8,917.52  acres. 


597,  323,   S.  D.,   5.      Gregorio  Tapia,  claimant  for  Aguajito,  one-half  square 

league,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  August  13th,  1835,  by  Jose  Figueroa 
to  G.  Tapia;  claim  filed  February  l7th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission. 
May  8th,  1855,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  February  8th,  1858. 

598,  270,  S.  D.     Maria  Antonia  Cruz,  claimant  for  Canada  de  los  Pifiacates,  one- 

fourth  square  league,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  November  20th,  1835,.. 
by  Jose  Castro  to  Jose  Cruz  and  Jose  Maria  Cruz ;  claim  filed  February 
17th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  January  23d,  1855,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed for  failure  of  prosecution  February  11th,  1856. 

599,  202,  S.  D.,  239.     Maria  Josefa  Soberanes,  claimant  for  Los  Coches,  2i  square 

leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  June  14th,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado. 


82  APPENDIX. 

to  M.  J.  Soberanes  ;  claim  filed  February  18th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission September  26th,  1854,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  September 
24th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857;  containing  8,794.09 
acres. 

600,  255,  S.  D.     Manuel  Castro,  claimant  for  Laguna  de  Tache,  9  square  leagues 

in  Monterey  county,  granted  January  10th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  M.  Castro  ; 
claim  filed  February  18th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  October  17th, 
1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  February  9th,  1858. 

601,  267,  S.  D.     Jeremiah  Clark,  claimant  for  part  of  Rancho  Laguna  de  Taehe, 

2  square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  January  10th,  1846,  by  Pio 
Pico  to  Manuel  Castro;  claim  filed  February  18th,  1853,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  October  17th,  1854,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  February 
9th,  1858.     On  claimant's  motion,  case  dismissed  February  10th,  1858. 

—  602,  399,  N.  D.  Francisco  Pico,  claimant  for  Las  Calaveras,  8  square  leagues, 
granted  July  20th,  1846^  by  Pio  Pico  to  F.  Pico  ;  claim  filed  February  18th, 

1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  October  16th,  1855,  confirmed  by  the 
District  Court  January  9th,  1858,  decree  reversed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme 
Court  and  petition  to  be  dismissed,  23  Howard,  321. 

603, 145,  N.  D.  Elizabeth  de  Zaldo,  claimant  for  50  varas  square,  at  the  Mission  Do- 
lores, granted  October  12th,  1842,  by  Francisco  Sanchez  to  Carlos  Moreno  ; 
claim  filed  February  18th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  August  9th, 

1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  March  24th,  1856. 

604,  284,  N.  D.  Stephen  Smith,  claimant  for  two  50- vara  lots,  in  San  Francisco, 
granted  December  4th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  S.  Smith ;  claim  filed  February 
19th,  1853,  and  rejected  by  the  Commission  March  27th,  1855. 

-—  605,  312,  N.  D.  John  Rose  et  al.,  claimants  for  6  square  leagues,  in  Yuba  county, 
granted  in  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  John  Smith  ;  claim  filed  Feb- 
ruary 19th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  May  22d,  1855,  by  the  Dis- 
trict Court  May  4th,  1857,  and  decree  reversed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court 
with  direction  to  dismiss  the  petition,  23  Howard,  262. 

606,  98,  S.  D.,  164.  Maria  Antonia  Pico  de  Castro  et  al.,  claimant  for  Bolsa 
Nueva  y  Moro  Cojo,  8  square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county — M«ro  Coyo, 
2  square  leagues,  granted  February  14th,  1825,  by  Luis  Arguello,  and  Bolsa 
Nueva,  1  square  league,  granted  by  Mariano  Chico,  May  14th,  1836  ;  lands 
between  the  two  above  tracts,  granted  November  20th,  1837,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado,  to  Simeon  Castro  ;  regrant  of  the  whole  property,  being  8  square 
leagues,  to  the  widow  and  representatives  of  S.  Castro,  September  26th, 
1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena;  claim  filed  February  19th,  1853,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  February  7th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  January  8th, 
1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  1st,  1858;  containing  28,827.78  acres. 


APPENDIX.  83 

^  607,  350,  S.  D.     Rufina  Castro,  claimant  for  one  lot  100  by  200  and  anotlicr  400 

vai'as  square,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  May  19th,  1839,  by  Jose  Castro 
to  Mariano  Castro;  claim  filed  February  19tli  1853,  ancl  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  July  3d,  1855. 

^  __  608,  280,  S.  D.  Bias  A.  Escarilla,  claimant  for  San  Vicente,  in  Santa  Cruz 
county,  granted  June  16th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  B.  A.  Escarilla;  claim 
filed  February  19th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  23d,  1855, 
by  the  District  Court  February  7th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  January 
7th,  1858. 

609, 425,  N.  D.,  and  388,  S.  D.  Archbishop  Joseph  Sadoc  Alemany,  claimant  for  the 
following  Missions  and  land ;  claim  filed  February  19th,  1853,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  December  18th,  1855,  appeal  dismissed  in  Northern  District 
March  16th,  1857,  and  in  Southern  District  March  15th,  1858.  [The  dates 
of  the  foundation  of  the  Missions  were  furnished  by  the  Reverend  Father 
Jose  Maria  de  Jesus  Gonzalez,  of  the  Mission  of  Santa  Barbara.] 
]/  Mission  San  Diego,  in  San  Diego  county,  founded  under  Carlos  III,  July  16th, 

1769  ;  containing  22.24  acres. 
Mission  San  Luis  Rey,  in  San  Diego  county,  founded  under  Carlos  IV,  June  13th, 

1798  ;  containing  53.39  acres. 
Mission  San  Juan  Capistrano,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  founded  under  Carlos  III, 
November  10th,  1776;  containing  44.40  acres. 
t  Mission  San  Gabriel  ArcangeL  in«Lps  Angeles  county,  founded  under  Carlos  III, 

September  8th,  1771 ;  contJiiiling  190.69  acres.     Patented. 
_-  Mission  San  Buenaventura,  in  Santa  Barbara  <;ounty,  founded  under  Carlos  III, 
March  31st,  1782;  containing  36.27  acres. 
*^  Mission  San  Fernando,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  founded  under  Carlos  IV,  Septem- 

ber 8th,  1797  ;  containing  76.94  acres. 
—  Mission  Santa  Barbara,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  foimded  under  Carlos  III,  De- 
cember 4th,  1786  ;  containing  37.83  acres. 

—  Mission  Santa  Inez,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  founded  under  Carlos  IV,  Septem- 

ber 17th,  1804;  containing  17.35  acres. 
.  Mission  La  Purisima  Concepcion,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  founded  under  Carlos 

III,  December  8th,  1787. 

—  Mission  San  Luis  Obispo,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  founded  under  Carlos  III, 

September  1st,  1772;  containing  52.72  acres.     Patented. 
Mission  San  Miguel  Arcangel,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  founded  under  Carlos 

IV,  July  25th,  1797  ;  containing  33.97  acres.     Patented. 

Mission  San  Antonio  de  Padua,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  founded  under  Carlos 

III,  July  14th,  1771 ;  containing  33.19  acres.     Patented. 
v^'         Mission  La  Soledad,  in  Monterey  county,  founded  under  Carlos  IV,  October  9th, 

1791  ;  containing  34.47  acres.     Patented. 
Mission  El  Carme  or  San  Carlos  de  Monterey,  in  Monterey  county,  founded  under 

Carlos  III,  June  3d,  1770;  containing  9  acres.     Patented. 
Mission  San  Juan  Bautista,  in  Monterey  county,  founded  under  Carlos  IV,  June 

24th,  1797;  containing  55.23  acres.     Patented. 
•«  Mission  Santa  Cruz,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  founded  under  Carlos  IV,  August 

28th,  1791 ;  containing  16.94  acres.    Patented. 


84  APPENDIX. 

^  V-  Mission  Santa  Clara,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  founded  under  Carlos  III,  January 

18th,  1777  ;  containing  13.13  acres.     Patented. 
^'  Mission  San  Jose,  in  Alameda  county,  founded  under  Carlos  IV,  June  11th,  1797  ; 

containing  28.33  acres.     Patented. 
^  Mission  Dolores  or  San  Francisco  de  Assis,  in  San  Francisco  county,  founded 

under  Carlos  III,  October  9th,  1776;  two  lots,  one  containing  4.3  acres  and 
the  other  4.51  acres.     Patented. 
V  Mission  San  Rafael  Arcangel,  in  Marin  county,  founded  under  Fernando  VII, 

December  18th,  1817  ;  containing  6.48  acres.     Patented. 
^_„^  Mission  San  Francisco  Solano,  in  Sonoma  county,  founded  under  Fernando  VII, 
August  25th,  1813;  containing  14.20  acres. 
Canada  de  los  Pinos  or  College  Rancho,  6  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Barbara 
county ;  containing  35,499.37  acres.     Patented. 
^  La  Laguna,  1  square  league,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county;  containing  4,157.02 
acres.     Patented. 
^.■  Two  Gardens,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county. 

,  610,  187,  S.  D.,  356.     Leander  Ransom,  claimant  for  Los  Laureles,  2,000  varas 

square,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  March  13th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Michel- 
torena  to  Jose  Agricia;  claim  filed  February  21st,  1853,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  August  29th,  1 854,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  June 
2d,  1857. 

:,  .^  611,  230,  N.  D.  Jacob  P.  Leese,  claimant  for  Lac,  1,000  varas  square,  in  So-, 
noma  county,  granted  July  25th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Da- 
moso  Rodriguez  ;  claim  filed  February  21st,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission December  12th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  December  28th, 
1857-,  and  appeal  dismissed  December  28th,  1857. 


612,  195,  N.  D.     Andres  Pico,  claimant  for  400  varas  square.  Mission  Dolores, 

granted  February  10th,  1846,  by  Pico  to  Jose  Prudencio  Santillan;  claim 
filed  February  21st,  1853,  and  rejected  by  the  Commission  January  23d, 
1855. 

613,  William  Cary  Jones  elal.,  claimants  for  Potrero  de  San  Francisco,  one-half 
square  league,  in  San  Francisco  county,  granted  May  1st,  1844,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  Ramon  de  Haro  and  Francisco  de  Haro  ;  claim  filed  Feb- 
ruary 23d,  1853,  and  discontinued  November  27th,  1855. 

614,  99,  S.  D.,  51.     John  Wilson  et  al,,  claimants  for  Saucito,  one  by  one-half 

league,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  May  22d,  1833,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to 
Craciano  Manjares;  claim  filed  February  23d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission February  7th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  December  29th,  1856, 
and  appeal  dismissed  January  21st,  1858;  containing  2,211.65  acres. 

615,  160,  S.  D.     Maria  Antonia  Pico  de  Castro  et  al.,  claimants  for  Corral  de 

Padilla,  2,000  varas  square,  granted  March  7th,  1836^  by  Nicolas  Gutierrez 


/' 


APPENDIX.  85 

to  Baldomero ;  claim  filed  Febniary  23d,  1 853,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
March  14th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  October 
24th,  1855. 

616,  364,  N.  D.  Jonathan  D.  Stevenson  et  ah,  claimants  for  Medanos,  2  square 
lea<i^ues,  in  Contra  Costa  county,  granted  November  26th,  1839,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  Jose  Antonio  Mesa  et  al. ;  claim  filed  February  24th,  1853, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  June  19th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  Octo- 
ber 16th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  April  2d,  1857;  containing  8,890.26 


617,  373,  N.  D.  Jos6  de  Jesus  Bernal  et  al.,  claimants  for  Canada  de  Pala,  8,000 
by  1,200  varas,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  August  9th,  1839,  by  Jose 
Castro  to  J.  de  Jesus  Bernal;  claim  filed  February  24th,  1853,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  June  26th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  May  7th,  1857  ; 
containing  15,714.10  acres. 

618,  166,  S.  D.,  456.    Jesus  Machado,  claimant  for  Buenavista,  one-half  square 

league,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  July  8th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Felipe  ; 
claim  filed  February  24th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  May  16th, 
1854,  by  the  District  Court  February  1st,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  Feb- 
ruary 24th,  1857. 

I  <^  —  619,  355,  N.  D.  Jos6  Noriega,  claimant  for  4  suertes,  in  Santa  Clara  county, 
granted  December  5th,  1845,  by  Mariano  Castro  to  J.  Noriega;  claim  filed 
February  24th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  July  3d,  1855,  and  appeal 
dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  February  23d,  1857. 

620,  172,  S.  D.,  79.     Rafael  Castro,  claimant  for  Aptos,  1  square  league,  in  Santa 

Cruz  county,  granted  November  16th,  1833,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  R.  Castro  ; 
claim  filed  February  24th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  May  16th, 
1854,  by  the  District  Court  October  11th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  Feb- 
ruary 23d,  1857;  containing  6,685.91  acres.     Patented. 

621,  338,  S.  D.  Richard  S.  Den,  claimant  for  Mission  of  Santa  Barbara,  in  Santa 
Barbara  county,  granted  June  10th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  R.  S.  Den;  claim 
filed  February  24th,  1853,  and  confirmed  by  the  Commission  June  12th, 
1855. 

622,  326,  S.  D.  Petronillo  Rios,  claimant  for  Mission  of  San  Miguel,  in  San 
Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  July  4th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  William  Reed, 
Petronillo  Rios  and  Miguel  Garcia ;  claim  filed  February  24th,  1853,  rejected 
by  the  Commission  May  15th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of 
prosecution  December  17th,  1856. 

623,  271,  S.  D.,  277.  Maria  Antonio  Ortega,  claimant  for  Atascadero,  in  San 
Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  May  6th,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Trifon 


86  APPENDIX. 


/i^B 


Garcia;  claim  filed  Eebruary  24tli,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  Jan- 
uary 2d,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  February 
11th,  1857. 

24,  209,  S.  D.,  201.  Carlos  C.  Espinoza,  claimant  for  Posa  de  los  Ositos,  4 
square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  May  7th,  1839,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  C.  C.  Espinoza;  claim  filed  February  24th,  1853,  rejected  by 
the  Commission  September  26th,  1854,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court 
September  26th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857  ;  contain- 
ing 16,938.98  acres.     Patented. 


625,  224,  S.  D.  Ysidro  Maria  Alvarado,  claimant  for  Monserrate,  3  square  leagues, 
in  San  Diego  county,  granted  May  4th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Y.  M.  Alva- 
rado ;  claim  filed  February  24th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  Novem- 
ber 14th,  1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  February  16th,  1857. 

-'-  626,  194,  N.  D.  William  Bennitz,  claimant  for  Briesgau,  5  square  leagues,  in 
Shasta  county,  granted  July  26th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Wm. 
Bennitz  ;  claim  filed  February  24th,"l853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  Sep- 
tember 26th,  1854,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  April  7th,  1856,  decree 
reversed  and  cause  remanded  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  with  direction  to 
dismiss  the  petition,  23  Howard,  255. 

— ^  627,  271,  N.  D.,  385.  Mamiel  Rodriguez,  claimant  for  Butano,  1  square  league, 
in  Santa  Cruz  county,  informal  grant  February  19th,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Al- 
varado, and  ratified  November  13th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Eo- 
mana  Sanchez ;  claim  filed  February  24th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission February  8th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  November  19th,  1856,  and 
appeal  dismissed  June  12th,  1857;  containing  3,025.65  acres. 

628,  262,  S.  D.,  369.  Maria  Antonia  Castro  de  Anzar  et  aL,  claimants  for  Real 
de  las  Aguilas,  7  square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  January 
17th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Francisco  Arias  and  Saturnino  Car- 
iaga;  claim  filed  February  24th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  Decem- 
ber 12th,  1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  February  9th,  1857. 

629,387,  N.  D.,  190.  Ferdinand  Vassault,  claimant  for  Camaritos,  300  varas 
square,  in  San  Francisco  county,  granted  January  21st,  1840,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  Jose  de  Jesus  Noe ;  claim  filed  February  24th,  1853,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  September  4th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  March  9th, 
1857,  and  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court. 

630,  163,  N.  D.  Quentin  Ortega,  claimant  for  San  Ysidro,  1  square  league,  in 
Santa  Clara  county,  granted  June  4th,  1833,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Q.  Ortega ; 
claim  filed  February  25th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  August  15th, 
1854,  by  the  District  Court  March  22d,  1858,  an(i  appeal  dismissed  March 
23d,  1858;  containing  4,437.67  acres. 


APPENDIX.  87 

>  631,  232,  S.  D.,  381.     Thomas  Blanco's  heirs,  claimants  for  400  by  600  varas,  one 

suerte,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  August  27th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Michel- 
torena  to  Thomas  Blanco;  claim  filed  February  25th,  1853,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  December  26th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  June  8th,  1857. 

^  632,  245,  N.  D.     James  L.  Ord,  claimant  for  2  square  leagues,  in  Tuolumne 

county,  granted  in  1844,  by  Manuel  Michcltorena  to  Salomon  Pico ;  claim 
filed  February  25th,  1853,  and  rejected  by  the  Commission  January  23d, 
1855. 

^  633,  274,  N.  D.  Sacramento  City,  claimant  for  land  granted  June  18th,  1841,  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  John  A.  Sutter;  claim  filed  February  25th,  1853^  re- 
jected by  the  Commission  March  6th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure 
of  prosecution  April  21st,  1856. 

i^  634,  283,  S.  D.,  108.     John  H.  Watson  and  D.  S.  Gregory,  claimants  for  Bolsa 

de  Pajaro,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  October  1st,  1836,  to  A.  Rodri- 
guez and  S.  Rodriguez;  claim  filed  February  25th,  1853,  and  rejected  by 
the  Commission  March  27th,  1855. 

ly  "--  635,  291,  S.  D.  Jose  Manuel  Borgas,  claimant  for  El  Pajaro,  six  suertes,  in 
Monterey  county,  granted  March  18th,  1843,  by  Jose  R.  Estrada  to  J.  M. 
Borgas ;  claim  filed  February  25th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  March 
27th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  December  18th,  1856. 

y  636,  304,  S.  D.,  303.     Maria  Concepcion  Boronda,  claimant  for  Potrero  de  San 

Luis  Obispo,  1  square  league,  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  granted  Novem- 
ber 8th,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  M.  C.  Boronda;  claim  filed  Febru- 
ary 26th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  February  6th,  1855,  and 
appeal  dismissed  February  3d,  1858;  containing  3,506.33  acres. 

V  637,  257,  N.  D.     Peter  H.  Burnett,  claimant  for  lot  in  Sacramento  City,  granted 

June  18th,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  John  A.  Sutter;  claim  filed  Feb- 
ruary 26th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  January  23d,  1855,  and  appeal 
dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April  21st,  1856. 

\it  638,  233,  N.  D.     Ellen  White  et  al.,  widow  and  heirs  of  Charles  White,  claimants 

for  Pala,  1  square  league,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  November  5th, 
1835,  by  Jose  Castro  to  Jose  Higuera;  claim  filed  February  26th,  1853, 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  December  19th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court 
February  23d,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  9th,  1858;  containing 
4,454.08  acres. 

^  639,  243,  N.  D.     City  of  Sonora,  claimant  for  1  square  mile ;  claim  filed  February 

26th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  January  23d,  1855,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed for  failure  of  prosecution  April  21st,  1856. 


88  APPENDIX. 

640.     Eufus  Eowe  et  ah,  claimants  for  part  of  Las  Pulgas,  l-J  square  leagues,  in 
San  Mateo  countj^,  granted  in  1820,  by  Pablo  V.  de  Sola  and  Jose  Castro 
I      V     to  Luis  Arguello;  claim  filed  February  28th,  1853,  and  discontinued  by 
J  \    claimant  March  13th,  1855.     (See  No.  2.) 


•641,  265,  N.  D.  Antonio  Maria  Oslo,  claimant  for  land  in  Santa  Clara  county, 
near  the  Mission,  granted  June  23d,  1846,  by  Jos6  Castro  to  A.  M.  Osio ; 
claim  filed  February  28th,  1853,  rejecte'd  by  the  Commission  February  6th, 
1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April  21st,  1856. 


642,  206,  N.  D.     Maria  Concepcion  Valencia  de  Eodriguez  et  aL,  claimants  for 

San  Francisquito,  8  suertes  of  200  varas  square  each,  in  Santa  Clara  county, 
granted  May  1st,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Antonio  Buelna ;  claim  filed 
February  28th,  185^7  confirmed  by  the  Commission  November  28th,  1854,  by 
the  District  Court  February  4th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  April  2d,  1857 ; 
containing  2,250.98  acres. 

643,  124,  N.  D.,  255.     Julio  Carrillo,  claimant  for  part  of  Cabeza  de  Santa  Eosa, 

in  Sonoma  county,  granted  September  30th,  1841,  by  Manuel  Jimeno  to 
Maria  Ygnacia  Lopez;  claim  filed  February  28th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  April  4th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857,  and 
appeal  dismissed  March  27th,  1857  ;  containing  4,500.42  acres. 

644,  128,  N.  D.,  255.     Jacob  E.  Mayer  et  aL,  claimants  for  part  of  Cabeza  de 

Santa  Eosa,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  September  30th,  1841,  by  Manuel 
Jimeno  to  Maria  Ygnacia  Lopez;  claim  filed  February  28th,  1853,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  April  4th,  1 854,  by  the  District  Court  March  2d, 
1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  27th,  1857  ;  containing  1,484.82  acres. 

645,  126,  N.  D.,  255.     James  Eldridge,  claimant  for  part  of  Cabeza  de  Santa  Eosa, 

in  Sonoma  county,  granted  September  30th,  1841,  by  Manuel  Jimeno  to 
Maria  Ygnacia  Lopez;  claim  filed  February  28th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  April  4th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857,  and 
appeal  dismissed  March  27th,  1857  ;  containing  1,667.68  acres. 


.  646,  127,  N.  D.,  255.     Felicidad  Carrillo,  claimant  for  part  of  Cabeza  de  Santa 

Eosa,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  September  30th,  1841,  by  Manuel  Jimeno 
to  Maria  Ygnacia  Lopez;  claim  filed  February  28th,  1853,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  April  4th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857. 

-     647,  125,  N,  D.,  255.     Juana  de  Jesus  Mallagh,  claimant  for  part  of  Cabeza  de 
'''"^  Santa  Eosa,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  September  30th,  1841,  by  Manuel 

Jimeno  to  Maria  Ygnacia  Lopez;  claim  filed  February  28th,  1853,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  April  4th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  March  2d, 
1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  27th,  1857  ;  containing  256.16  acres. 


APPENDIX.  89 

648,  31 4,  N.  D.     Maria  Teodora  Peralta,  claimant  for  Bnacocha,  2|  square  leagues, 

in  Marin  county,  granted  February  IStli,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  M.  T.  Per- 
alta ;  claim  filed  February  28th,  1853,  and  rejected  by  the  Commission  April 
3d,  1855. 

649,  149,  N.  D.,  200.     Otto  H.  Frank  et  ah,  claimants  for  part  of  Napa,  6,156 

acres,  in  Napa  county,  granted  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Salvador  Vallejo  ; 
claim  filed  February  28th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  August  22d, 
1854,  by  the  District  Court  June  12th,  1858,  and  appeal  dismissed  June 
12th,  1858. 


650,  198,  S.  D.,  4.     Joaquin  Soto,  claimant  for  Canada  de  la  Carpenteria,  one-half 

square  league,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  September  25th,  1845,  by  Jos6 
Castro  to  J.  Soto;  claim  filed  February  28th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Com- 
mission August  15th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  October  12th,  1855,  and 
appeal  dismissed  February  24th,  1857  ;  containing  2,236.13  acres. 

651,  384,  N.  D.,  359.     James  Williams,  Maria  Louisa  Carson  and  John  S.  Wil- 

liams, widow  and  son  of  John  S.  Williams,  the  heirs  and  legal  representa- 
tives of  Edward  A.  Farwell,  and  the  heirs  of  John  Potter,  claimants  for 
Kancho  de  Farwell,  called  Arroyo  Chico  in  Jimeno's  Index,  5  square 
leagues,  in  Butte  county,  granted  March  29th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Michelto- 
rena  to  Edward  A.  Farwell;  claim  filed  February  ^  8th,  1853,  confirmed  to 
claimants,  except  the  heirs  of  J.  Potter,  by  the  Commission  August  28th, 
1855,  by  the  District  Court  nunc  pro  tunc  June  15th,  1858,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed March  21st,  1857  ;  containing  22,193.93  acres. 

\ 
652,^305,  N.  D.     Benjamin  S.  Lippincott,  claimant  for  11  square  leagues,  in  San 

Joaquin  county,  granted  April  4th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Jose  Castro  ;  claim 

filed  February  28th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  May  8th,  1855,  and 

appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April  28th,  1856. 

653.     Frederick  E.  Whiting,  claimant  for  Las  Animas,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  ^ 
granted  in  1802,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Mariano  Castro ;  claim  filed  February 


s 


28th,  1853. 


^  '"■  654,  304,  N.  D.  Inocencio  Romero  et  al.,  claimants  for  land  in  Contra  Costa 
county,  granted  February  4th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  I.  Romero 
et  al. ;  claim  filed  February  28th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April 
17th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  September  16th,  1857. 

/  -3-  655,  272,  N.  D.  George  Swat,  claimant  for  Nueva  Flandria,  3  square  leagues, 
granted  in  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  G.  Swat ;  claim  filed  February 
28th,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  March  27th,  1855,  and  by  the  Dis- 
trict Court  October  5th,  1857. 


90  APPENDIX. 

656,  415,  N.  D.  John  A.  Sutter,  for  Moqaelumne  Indians,  claimant  for  4  square 
leagues,  in  Sacramento  county,  granted  December  22d,  1844,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  Moquelumne  Indians;  claim  filed  February  28th,  1853, 
and  confirmed  by  the  Commission  November  20th,  1855. 

*.  657,  375,  N.  D.,  305.  Martin  E.  Cook  et  ah,  claimants  for  part  of  Malacomes  or 
Moristal,  2  miles  square,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  October  1843,  by  Man- 
uel Micheltorena  to  Jose  de  los  Santos  Berreyesa ;  claim  filed  February 
28th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  August  7th,  1855,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed April  16th,  1857  ;  containing  2,559.94  acres.     Patented. 

658,  286,  N.  D.  Nathaniel  Bassett,  claimant  for  Los  Coluses,  4  square  leagues, 
in  Colusi  county,  granted  in  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Juan  Dau- 
benbiss  ;  claim  filed  February  28tli,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
March  20th,  1855,»by  the  District  Court  April  17th,  1856,  decree  reversed  by 
the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  and  cause  remanded  with  direction  to  dismiss  the 
petition,  21  Howard,  412. 

_^,.  659,  235,  N.  D.,  255.  John  Hendley,  claimant  for  part  of  Cabeza  de  Santa  Rosa, 
1  mile  square,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  September  30th,  1841,  by  Manuel 
Jimeno  to  Maria  Ygnacia  Lopez;  claim  filed  February  28th,  1853,  con- 
firmed by  the  Commission  December  19th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court 
March  2d,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  27th,  1857  ;  containing  640.19 
acres. 

—  660,  396,  N.  D.,  266.  J.  H.  Fine,  claimant  for  part  of  Suisun,  in  Solano  county, 
granted  January  28th,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Francisco  Solano; 
claim  filed  February  28th,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  December 
4th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  August  20th,  1857. 

661,  252,  N.  D.  E.  R.  Carpentier,  claimant  for  10  square  leagues,  in  Contra 
Costa  county,  a  portion  granted  by  P^V.  de  Sola,  another  portion  granted 
in  1841  to  Juan  Jose  and  Victor  Castro  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado,  and  another 
(■  portion  granted  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Francisco  Castro,  and  regranted  in 
1844  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Luis  Peralta;  claim  filed  February  28th, 
1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  January  30th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed 
for  failure  of  prosecution  April  21st,  1856. 

^,, 662.     H.  W.  Carpentier,  claimant  for  225  acres,  in  Contra  Costa  county,  granted 

7     by  P,  V.  de  Sola  and  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Liiis  Peralta ;  claim  filed 
February  28th,  1853,  and  discontinued  by  claimant  January  23d,  1855. 

663,  422,  N.  D.,  and  387,  S.  D.     Joseph  Sadoc  Alemany,  claimant,  in  behalf  of 

the  Christianized  Indians  formerly  connected  with  the  Missions  of  Upper 

r  California:     1st.  In  behalf  of  the  Indians  of  Santa  Clara,  under  a  grant 

'  by  Manuel  Micheltorena,  June  10th,  1844,  for  all  the  vacant  lands  of  Santa 


APPENDIX.  91 

Clara  ungranted  before  that  time.  2d.  In  behalf  of  the  Indians  for  lands 
known  as  Las  Gallinas,  El  Nacimiento  and  La  Estrella,  in  San  Luis  Obispo 
county,  under  a  grant  of  Manuel  Micheltorena,  July  16th,  1844.  3d.  In 
behalf  of  sixteen  Neophytes,  for  small  tracts  of  land,  from  100  to  300  acres 
each,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Mission  of  Santa  Ynes,  Santa  Barbara  county. 
4th.  And  in  behalf  of  the  Indians  generally,  one  square  league  in  each  of 
the  21  Missions  (see  No.  609).  Claim  filed  February  28th,  1853,  rejected 
by  the  Commission  December  31st,  1855,  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of 
prosecution  in  the  Northern  District  February  23d,  1857,  and  in  the  South- 
ern District  December  22d,  1857. 


664,  259,  N.  D.,  349.     L.  Hoover,  Administrator,  claimant  for  5  square  leagues, 

called  Rio  de  las  Plumas  in  Jimeno's  Index,  in  Butte  county,  granted  Feb- 
ruary 21st,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Charles  W.  Flugge ;  claim 
filed  March  1st,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  January  23d,  1855,  and 
appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April  21st,  1856. 

665,  322,  S.  D.,  81.     Heirs  of  David  Littlejohn,  claimants  for  Los  Carneros,   1 

square  league,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  June  28th,  1834,  by  Jose  Fig- 
ueroa  to  David  Littlejohn;  claim  filed  March  1st,  1853,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  May  22d,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  1st,  1858  ;  con- 
taining 4,482.38  acres. 

666,  236,  N.  D.,  322.     A.  Randall,  claimant  for  Punta  de  los  Reyes,  11  square 

leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  November  30th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Mich- 
eltorena to  Antonio  M.  Oslo  ;  claim  filed  March  1st,  1853,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  January  9th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  December  28th,  1858, 
and  appeal  dismissed  May  24th,  1858;  containing  48,189.34  acres.  Pat- 
ented. 


667,  283,  N.  D.,  343.  Jos6  M.  Revere,  claimant  for  San  Geronimo,  2  square 
leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  February  12th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Michel- 
torena to  Rafael  Cacho;  claim  filed  March  1st,  1853,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  February  13th,  1855,  by  the  Disti'ict  Court  June  26th,  1858, 
and  appeal  dismissed  June  26th,  1858;  containing  8,701  acres.    Patented. 


668,  279,  S.  D.  Bruno  Bernal,  claimant  forEl  Alisal,  I3  square  leagues,  in  Mon- 
terey county,  granted  June  26th,  1 834^by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Feliciano  Sober- 
anes  et  al. ;  claim  filed  March  1st,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  Jan- 
uary 23d,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  January  13th,  1857,  and  appeal 
dismissed  March  4th,  1858;  containing  5,941.12  acres. 


669,  335,  N.  D.,  566.  Francisco  Arce,  claimant  for  50  by  60  varas,  in  Santa  Clara 
county,  granted  June  3d,  1846^  by  Pio  Pico  to  F.  Arce  ;  claim  filed  March 
1st,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  June  12th,  1855,  and  by  the  Dis- 
trict Court  March  9th,  1857. 


92  APPENDIX. 

^     670,  151,  N.  D.     Prcsentacion  de  Ridley  et  al.,  claimants  for  Canada  de  Guada- 
lupe, 2  square  leagues,  granted  July  31st,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
^  Jacob  P.  Leese;  claim  filed  March  1st,  ISSS^rejected  by  the  Commission 

August  1st,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  December  28th,  1857. 

€71,  165,  N.  D.  C.  S.  de  Bernal  et  ah,  claimants  for  200  varas  square.  Mission 
Dolores,  granted  in  1834,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Jose  C.  Bernal;  claim  filed 
March  1st,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  August  8th,  1854,  by  the 
District  Court  March  24th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  April  1st,  1857; 
containing  6.32  acres. 

'-  672,  178,  N.  D.  Jose  de  la  Cruz  Sanchez,  claimant  for  San  Mateo,  2  square 
leagues,  in  San  Mateo  county,  petitioned  for  by  J.  de  la  Cruz  Sanchez  in 
December  1836  and  April  1844;  claim  filed  March  1st,  1853,  and  rejected 
by  the  Commission  September  19th,  1854. 

673,206,  S.  D.  Francisco  Soberanes,  claimant  for  Sanjon  de  Santa  Rita,  11 
square  leagues,  in  Merced  and  Fresno  counties,  granted  September  7th, 
1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  F.  Soberanes;  claim  filed  March  1st,  1853, 
rejected  by  the  Commission  September  19th,  1854,  confirmed  by  the  Dis- 
trict Court  February  9th,  1858,  and  appeal  dismissed  November  1st,  1860; 
containing  48,823.84  acres. 

674,  277,  S.  D.  Rafael  Sanchez,  claimant  for  San  Lorenzo,  1 1  square  leagues,  in 
Monterey  county,  granted  July  27th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  R.  Sanchez; 
claim  filed  March  1st,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  January  13th,  1855, 
confirmed  by  the  District  Court  March  6th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  Feb- 
ruary 24th,  1857  ;  containing  48,285.95  acres. 

—  675,  225,  S.  D.  Nicolas  Morchon,  claimant  for  Cahuepga,  4  square  leagues,  in 
Los  Angeles  county,  granted  July  29th,  1 846,  by  Jos6  Castro  to  Luis  Are- 
nas;  claim  filed  March  1st,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  October 
24th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  September  13th,  1859. 

676.  John  B.  Frisbie,  claimant  for  Matzultaquea,  4  square  leagues,  in  Los  Ange- 

les county,  granted  in  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Ramon  Carrillo  ;  claim  filed 
March  1st,  1853,  and  discontinued. 

677,  215,  N.  D.,  45.     Joaquin  Higuera,  claimant  for  Pala,   1  square  league,  in 

Santa  Clara  county,  granted  November  5th,  1835,  by  Jose  Castro  to  Jos6  '^' 
Higuera;  claim  filed  March  1st,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  Decem- 
ber 26th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April  21st, 
1856. 

^  678,  282,  S.  D.,  113.  Miguel  Villagran,  claimant  for  Aguajito,  500  varas  square,  in 
Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  November  20th,  1837,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
M.  Villagran;  claim  filed  March  1st,  1853,  and  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
sion February  20th,  1855. 


APPENDIX.  93 

679,  300,  S.  D.     Vicente  Gomez  et  al.,  claimants  for  El  Tucho,  1,500  varas  sqnare, 

in  Monterey  county,  granted  December  4th,  1843,  by  Joso  R.  Estrada  to 
Jose  Joaquin  Gomez  ;  claim  filed  March  1st,  1853,  and  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission March  27th,  1855. 

680,  384,  S.  D.,  297.     Maria  Antonia  Castro  de  Anzar  et  al.,  claimants  for  Los 

Carneros,  1  square  league,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  October  7th,  1842, 
by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Maria  Antonia  Linares;  claim  filed  March  1st, 
1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  August  28th,  1855,  by  the  District 
Court  December  9th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  4th,  1858 ;  contain- 
ing 1,628.70  acres. 

681,  330,   S.  D.,  159.     Ermenegildo  Vasquez,  claimant  for  500  by  400  varas, 

in  Monterey  county,  granted  November  6th,  1835,  by  Jose  Castro  to  E. 
Vasquez;  claim  filed  March  1st,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  March 
27th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  December  28th, 
1856. 

682,  C.  S.  de  Bernal,  claimant  for  200  varas  square,  in  San  Francisco  county, 
granted  in  1833,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Jose  C.  Bernal;  claim  filed  March  1st, 
1853,  and  discontinued  January  23d,  1855.     (See  No.  671.) 

""  683,  417,  N.  D.  Hiram  Grimes,  claimant  for  part  of  New  Helvetia,  in  Yuba  and 
Sutter  counties,  granted  June  18th,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  John  A. 
Sutter;  claim  filed  March  1st,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  January 
15th,  1856,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  March  6th,  1857. 

684,  404,  N.  D.     Juan  B.  Alvarado,  claimant  for  Nicasio,  20  square  leagues,  in 

Marin  county,  granted  March  13th,  1835,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Teodocio 
Quilajuequi  et  al.,  Indians;  claim  filed  March  1st,  1853,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  September  25th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  pros- 
ecution February  4th,  1858. 

685,  290,  N.  D.     Henry  C.  Smith,  claimant  for  one-fourth  league,  in  Santa  Clara 

county,  granted  November  2d,  1844,  by  Miguel  Muro  (priest j  to  Buena-' 
Ventura  et  al.,  (Neophytes);  claim  filed  March  1st,  1853,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  March  27th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecu- 
tion April  21st,  1856. 

686,  277,  N.  D.     William  C.  Jones  et  al.,  claimants  for  San  Pablo,  3  square 

leagues,  in  Contra  Costa  county,  granted  June  12th,  1834,  by  Jose  Figueroa 
to  Francisco  Maria  Castro  ;  claim  filed  March  1st,  1853,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  March  27th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecu- 
tion April  21st,  1856. 

->   687,  196,  N.  D.    Jose  de  Arnas,  claimant  for  5  square  leagues  of  Santa  Clara 


94  APPENDIX. 

Mission  lands,  granted  August  1st,  1846,  by  Jose  Castro  to  J.  de  Arnas ; 
claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April  24th,  1855, 
and  by  the  District  Court  February  11th,  1856. 

^  688,  324,  S.  D.  Juan  Temple  and  David  W.  Alexander,  claimants  for  100  varas 
square,  in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  March  11th,  1834,  by  Jose  Figueroa 
to  Jose  A.  Carrillo  and  Abel  Stearns  ;  claim  filed  MarcTi  2d,  1 853,  rejected 
by  the  Commision  May  22d,  1855,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court 
April  3d,  1861. 


689,  278,  S.  D.     Maria  Antonio  Pico  et  ah,  claimants  for  Bolsa  de  San  Cayetano, 

7    in  Monterey  county,  granted  by  Don  Pablo  de  Sola,  and  October  18th,  1824, 
by  Luis  Arguello,  to  Jose  Dolores  Pico  and  Ignacia  Vallejo  ;  claim  filed 
'' "  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  January  30th,  1855,  and  appeal 

dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  March  7th,  1860. 

690,  405,  N.  D.,  26.     Kufina  Castro  et  al.,  claimants  for  Solis,  in  Santa  Clara 

county,  granted  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Mariano  Castro ;  claim  filed  March 
2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  December  4th,  1855,  confirmed  by 
the  District  Court  May  1st,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  March  24th,  1857 ; 
containing  8,875.46  acres.     Patented. 

691,  291,  N.  D.,  185.     James  Enright  et  al.,  claimants  for  Medano,  (see  No.  616) 

2  square  leagues,  in  Contra  Costa  county,  granted  November  26th,  1839, 
by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Jose  Antonio  and  Jose  Maria  Meza ;  claim  filed 
March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  March  27th,  1855,  and  appeal 
dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April  21st,  1856. 

692,  337,  N.  D.     Guillermo  Castro,  claimant  for  land  in  Alameda  county,  granted 

January  14th,  1840,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  G.  Castro  ;  claim  filed  March 
2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  May  15th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed 
for  failure  of  prosecution  March  9th,  1857. 

693,  344,  N.  D.     Jose  Castro  et  al.,  claimants  for  11  square  leagues,  on  the  San 

Joaquin  river,  (see  Nos.  320  and  652)  granted  April  4th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico 
to  Jose  Castro  ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1 853,  confirmed  by  tlie  Commission 
May  8th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  November  4th,  1858,  and  judgment  of 
the  Circuit  Court  reversed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court  with  direction  to 
dismiss  the  petition,  24  Howard,  346. 

694,  141,  N.  D.,  200.     Ann  McDonald  et  al.,  claimants  for  part  of  Napa,  in  Napa 

county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B,  Alvarado  to  Salvador 
Vallejo;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April 
25th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  Februaiy  18th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed 
April  1st,  1857. 

695,  Thomas  Shaddon,  claimant  for  5  square  leagues,  in  Yolo  county,  granted 
December  22d,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  T.  Shaddon;  claim  filed 
March  2d,  1853.    Discontinued. 


APPENDIX.  m 

^^ 696,  264,  N.  D.     William  Blackburn,  claimant  for  Arastradero,  1  square  league, 

in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  November  17tli,  1844,  by  Manuel  Rodriguez 
to  Alberto  F.  Morris ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,'rejccted  by  the  Commis- 
sion January  23d,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution 
April  2lst,  1856. 

^'  697,  345,  S.  D.  Julian  Workman  et  al.,  claimants  for  Mission  of  San  Gabriel,  in 
Los  Angeles  county,  granted  June  8th,  1846,  by Tio  Pico  to  J.  Workman 
and  Hugo  Reid;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
June  26th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  April  1st,  1861. 

»  698,  301,  S.  D.     R.  S.  Den,  claimant  for  San  Antonio,  4,000  yards  square,  in  Los 

Angeles  county,  granted  April  29th,  rS4'2,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Nicho- 
las A.  Den ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  March 
27th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  December  19th, 
1856. 

K  -^  '  699,  400,  N.  D.  Narciso  Bennett,  claimant  for  140  varas  square,  one  solar,  in 
Santa  Clara  coimty,  granted  November  28th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  N.  Ben- 
nett; claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  October  23d, 
1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  February  23d,  1857. 

*^  700,  317,  S.  D.,  235.  Pio  Pico  et  al.,  claimants  for  Santa  Margarita  and  Las 
Flores,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  May  10th,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado 
to  Pio  Pico  and  Andres  Pico;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  and  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  April  24th,  1855. 

701,  192,  N.  D.     Pedro  Chaboya,  claimant  for  2  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Clara 

county,  granted  to  P.  Chaboya ; ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  October  24th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  for  failure  of 
prosecution  August  29th,  1861. 

702,  237,  S.  D.     Jos6  and  Jaime  de  Puig  Monmany,  claimants  for  Noche  Buena, 

a  little  less  than  1  square  league,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  September 
15th,  1835,  by  Jose  Castro  to  Juan  Antonio  Muuoz  ;  claim  filed  March  2d, 
1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  October  24th,  1854,  by  the  District 
Court  February  14th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  January  27th,  1858;  con- 
taining 4,411.56  acres. 

703,  191,  N.  D. ;  179  S.  D.  Modesta  Castro,  claimant  for  Canada  de  los  Osos, 
11  square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  October  20th,  1844,  by 
Manuel  Micheltorena  to  M.  Castro;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected 
by  the  Commission  August  29th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of 
prosecution  October  24t]i,  1855. 

»^      704,  173,  N.  D.     Heirs  of  Francisco  de  Haro,  claimants  for  100  varas  square, 
in  Mission  Dolores,  granted  June  28th,  1841,  by  Francisco  Guerrero,  Jus- 


l/ 


96  APPENDIX. 

tice  of  the  Peace,  to  Francisco  de  Haro;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  re- 
jected by  the  Commission  September  19th,  1854,  and  confirmed  by  the  Dis- 
trict Court  February  1st,  1858. 

1/  705,  166,  N.  D.  Heirs  of  Francisco  de  Haro,  claimants  for  50  varas  square, 
in  Mission  Dolores,  granted  August  16th,  1843,  under  a  marginal  decree, 
by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Francisco  de  Haro;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853, 
rejected  by  the  Commission  August  29th,  1854,  confirmed  by  the  District 
Court  August  24th,  1857,  and  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court,  22  Howard,  293. 

706,  383,  N.  D.  William  A.  Dana  et  al.,  claimants  for  part  of  San  Antonio,  6,102 
acres,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  March  24th,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alva- 
rado to  Juan  Prado  Mesa;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission July  10th,  1855,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  March  3d,  1856, 
and  appeal  dismissed  March  20th,  1857;  containing  3,541.89  acres.  Pat- 
ented. 

-  ^-  707,  366,  N.  D.  William  A.  Dana  et  al.,  claimants  for  part  of  San  Antonio,  2,551 
acres,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  March  24th,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alva- 
rado to  Juan  Prado  Mesa ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission July  10th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  March  23d,  1857. 

^  708,  368,  N.  D.  James  W.  Weeks,  claimant  for  part  of  San  Antonio,  3,051  acres, 
in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  March  24th,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
Juan  Prado  Mesa;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
July  10th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  February 
23d,  1857. 

^^.  709,  354,  N.  D.  Henry  C.  Curtis,  claimant  for  part  of  San  Antonio,  500  acres, 
in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  March  24th,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
Juan  Prado  Mesa;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
July  10th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  March  16th,  1857. 

^^  710,  378,  N.  D.  William  W.  White,  claimant  for  part  of  San  Antonio,  100  acres, 
in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  March  24th,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to 
Juan  Prado  Mesa;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
July  10th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  February 
23d,  1857. 

711,  193,  N.  D.     Victor  Prudon,  claimant  for  Island  of  Sacramento,  3|  by  1 

league,  in  the  Sacramento  river,  granted  July  6th,  1 844,  by  Manuel  Michel- 
torena  to  Victor  Prudon ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission October  24th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  February  7th,  1858. 

712,  357,  N.  D.     Roland  Gelston,  claimant  for  200  by  50  varas,  in  San  Francisco 

county,  granted  December  1st,  1838,  to  William  Gulnac ;  claim  filed  March 
2d,  1853,  and  rejected  by  the  Commission  September  4th,  1855. 


APPENDIX.  97 

713,  294,  N,  D.,  102.     Juan  Alvirez  et  al.,  claimants  for  Lacuna  Scca,  4  square 

leagues,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  July  22cl,  1834,  by  Jose  Figucroa 
w      to  Juan  Alvirez;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected' by  the  Commission 
March  20th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April 
21st,  1856. 

714,  382,  S.  D.     City  of  Monterey,  claimant  for  lands  previously  assigned  to  the 

pueblo,  dedication  approved  by  the  Territorial  Deputation  July  24th,  1830 ; 
claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  22d, 
'  ^'       1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  1st,  1858. 

715,  315,  N.  D.     Jose  Y.  Limantour,  claimant  for  80  square  leagues,  10  leagues 

on  the  Pacific  ocean,  between  latitude  39  °  18'  and  39  ®  48'  north,  run- 
ning back  eight  leagues  in  Mendocino  county,  south  of  Cape  Mendocino, 
granted  December  20th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  J.  Y.  Limantour ; 
claim  filed  March  2d,  1853',  rejected  by  the  Commission  April  24th,  1855, 
and  appeal  dismissed  April  28th,  1856. 

716,  274,  S.  D.,  351.     Thomas  Coal,  claimant  for  250  by  150  varas  and  100  varas 

more,  part  of  Tucho,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  December  8th,  1 842,  by 
Juan  B.  Alvarado,  and  400  varas  square,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  Feb- 
ruary 28th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena,  to  T.  Coal ;  claim  filed  March 
2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  January  23d,  1855,  and  confirmed  by 
the  District  Court  June  6th,  1857. 


^  717,  225,  N,  D.,  200.  Salvador  Vallejo,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa  or  Francas  and 
Jalapa,  3,020  acres,  in  Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan 
B.  Alvarado  to  Salvador  Vallejo;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed 
by  the  Commission  November  7th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  February 
23d,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  May  13th,  1857  ;  containing  3,178.93  acres. 


718,  361,  N.  D.,  485.     Mary  S.  Bennett,  claimant  for  two  tracts,  one  140  varas 

square  and  the  other  2,000  by  1,000  varas,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  near  the 
Mission,  granted  December  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Narciso  Bennett;  claim 
filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  July  10th,  1855,  by  the 
District  Court  February  28th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed  April  14th,  1857  ; 
containing  358.51  acres. 

719,  154,  N.  D.,  256.     Joseph  Pope  et  al.,  claimants  for  Locoallomi,  2  square 

leagues,  in  Napa  county,  granted  September  30th,  1841,  by  Manuel  Jimeno 
to  Julian  Pope;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmeS  by  the  Commission, 
August  1st,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  August  25th,  1856,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed February  9th,  1858  ;  containing  8,872.79  acres. 


720,  122,  N.  D.,  200.     Horace  Inghram,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  74  acres,  in 
Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Salva- 

a 


98  APPENDIX. 

dor  Yallejo ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1 853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
April  11th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857. 

y  721,  146,  N.  D.,  200.     James  M.  Harbin,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  688  acres,  in 

Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Sal- 
vador Vallejo;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
May  16th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  December  23d,  1857. 

^  722,  111,  N.  D.  200.     Hannah  McCoombs,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  160  acres, 

in  Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Sal- 
vador Vallejo;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
April  11th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857. 

•^  723,  123,  N.  D.,  200.     Hart  and  McGarry,  claimants  for  part  of  Napa,  500  acres, 

in  Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Sal- 
vador Vallejo;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
April  11th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857. 

^  724,  109,  N.  D.,  200.     N.  Coombs,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  in  Napa  county, 

granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Salvador  Vallejo; 
claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  11th,  1854, 
and  by  the  District  Court  April  4th,  1861. 

725,  116,  N.  D.,  200.  A.  Farley,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  44  acres,  in  Napa 
county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B,  Alvarado  to  Salvador 
Vallejo;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April 
11th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1867. 

¥  726,  120,  N.  D.,  200.     George  N.  Comwell,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  in  Napa 

county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Salvador 
Vallejo  ;  claim  filed  March  2}1,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April 
11th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857. 

y'  727,  118,  N.  D.,  200.    John  Truebody,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  796  acres,  in 

Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  JuanB.  Alvarado  to  Salva- 
dor Vallejo;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
April  11th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857. 

y/^  728,  113,  N.  D.,  153.    R.  S.  Kilbum,  claimant  for  part  of  Entre  Napa,  granted 

April  9th,  1836,  by  Mariano  Chico  to  Nicolas  Higuera;  claim  filed  March 
2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  11th,  1854,  and  by  the  Dis- 
trict Court  March  30th,  1861. 

^  729,  117,  N.  D.,  200.     A.  L.  Boggs,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  320  acres,  in  Napa 

county,  granted  September  21st,  183J,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Salvador 


APPENDIX.  99 

Vallejo  ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April 
nth,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857. 

730,  110,  N.  D.,  200.  J.  R.  McCoombs,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  487  acres,  in 
Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Sal- 
vador Vallejo;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
April  11th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  April  18th,  1859. 


731,  393,  N.  D.,  200.  Ogden  Wise,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  623.85  acres,  in 
Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Sal- 
vador Vallejo;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
December  4th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  August  6th,  1857. 

l^  732,  71,  N.  D.,  200.  Julius  K.  Rose,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  526  acres,  in 
Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Sal- 
vador Vallejo;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
December  13th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  October  6th,  1858,  and  appeal 
dismissed  October  8th,  1858;  containing  594.83  acres. 

733,  79,  N.  D.,  200.  William  H.  Osborn,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  250  acres, 
in  Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Sal- 
vador Vallejo  ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1^^3~confirmed  by  the  Commission 
December  13th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  October  6th,  1858,  and  appeal 
dismissed  October  8th,  1858;  containing  259.61  acres. 


734,  66,  N.  D.,  200.     Lyman  Bartlett,  claimant  for- part  of  Napa,  1  square  mile, 

in  Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Sal- 
vador Vallejo ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  ISSH^confirmed  by  the  Commission 
December  13th,  1853,  by  the  District  Court  April  21st,  1856,  and  appeal 
dismissed  April  2d,  1857;  containing  679.52  acres. 

735,  313,  N.  D.,  200.     Eben  Knight,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  one-half  mile 

square,  in  Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alva- 
rado to  Salvador  Vallejo  ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  .and  rejected  by  the 
Commission  March  27th,  1855. 

736,  76,  N.  D.,  200.     James  McNeil,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  450  acres,  in 

Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Sal- 
vador Vallejo ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  and  confirmed  by  the  Commis- 
mission  December  13th,  1853. 


737,  139,  N.  D.,  200.  Archibald  A.  Ritchie,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  150  acres, 
in  Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Sal- 
vador Vallejo;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
April  25th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857. 


100  APPENDIX. 

-—  738,  164,  S.  D.     City  of  San  Luis  Obispo,  claimant  for  4  square  leagues ;  claim 
~?  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  August  1st,  1854,  and 
appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  October  24th,  1855. 

„--  739,  327,  N.  D.,  229.  Joseph  Hooker,  claimant  for  part  of  Agua  Caliente,  in  So- 
noma county,  granted  July  13th,  1840,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Lazaro 
Pina;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853^  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April 
24th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed 
March  27th,  1857;  containing  550.86  acres. 

740,  372,  N.  D.,  208.     Benjamin  R.  Buckelew,  claimant  for  Punta  de  Quentin,  2 

square  leagues,  in  Marin  county,  granted  September  24th,  1840,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  Juan  B.  R.  Cooper;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  July  10th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  March  30th, 
1857. 

741,  153,  N.  D.     Mariano  G.  Vallejo,  claimant  for  Agua  Caliente,  in  Sonoma 

county,  granted  July  13th,  1840,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Lazaro  Pina; 
claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  August  1st,  1854, 
and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  July  13th,  1859. 

„.  742,  412,  N.  D.  J.  W.  Redman  et  al.,  claimants  for  Orchard  of  Santa  Clara,  10 
acres,  granted  June  30th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Benito  Dias,  Juan  Castaiieda 
and  Luis  Arenas  ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
December  18th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  May  21st,  1858. 

-  743.  John  A.  Sutter,  claimant  for  surplus  lands  of  New  Helvetia,  22  square 
leagues,  in  Yuba  and  Sutter  counties,  granted  February  5th,  1 845,  by  Man- 
uel Micheltorena  to  John  A.  Sutter;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853.  Discon- 
tinued. 

--  744,  142,  N.  D.  Guadalupe  Mining  Company,  claimant  for  part  of  Canada  de 
los  Capitancillos,  described  by  boundaries,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted 
September  1st,  1842,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Justo  Larios ;  claim  filed 
March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  May  2d,  1854,  and  by  the 
District  Court  August  17th,  1857.     (See  No.  340 .j 

745,  285,  N.  D.,  245.  Henry  R.  Payson,  claimant  for  Canada  de  Guadalupe  and 
Visitacion  y  Rodeo  Viejo,  2  square  leagues,  in  San  Mateo  county,  granted 
July  31st,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Jacob  P.  Leese ;  claim  filed  March 
'  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  30th,  1855,  by  the  District 
Court  June  18th,  1856,  and  appeal  dismissed  April  1st,  1857;  containing 
9,594.90  acres. 


•^  746,  293,  N.  D.     Mowry  W.  Smith,  claimant  for  part  of  Las  Pulgas,  7,000  acres, 
-y  in  San  Mateo  county,  granted  in  1835,  by  P.  V.  de  Sola  and  Jose  Castro  to 


APPENDIX.  101 

Luis  Arguello  ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
February  20th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April 
21st,  1856. 

—  747,  383,  S.  D.  Thomas  Russell,  claimant  for  800  varas  square,  in  Santa  Cruz 
county,  granted  in  1838,  by  Jos6  E.  Estrada,  Prefect,  to  Jose  R.  Buelna, 
and  Potrero  and  Rincon  de  San  Pedro,  500  varas  from  east  to  west  and  600 
varas  from  north  to  south,  granted  in  1842  by  Jose  Jimeno  to  Jose  Arana ; 
claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  grant  of  800  varas  rejected  and  grant  by  Jimeno 
confirmed  by  the  Commission  January  30th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court 
June  18th,  1859. 

748.     Martin  Murphy,  Sr.,  claimant  for  part  of  Las  Animas,  one-eighth  of  12 
^  ,       square  leagues,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  August  17th,  1802,  by  Mar- 
_3 /<;--''    quina,  and  August  7th,  1835,  by  Jose  Figuei'oa,  to  Mariano  Castro;  claim 
filed  March  2d,  1853,  and  discontinued  April  3d,  1855.     (See  No.  161.) 


—  749,  295,  S.  D.  Talbot  H.  Green,  claimant  for  land  under  a  grant  of  the  Ayun- 
tamiento  of  the  town  of  Monterey  of  April  23d,  1846;  claim  filed  March 
2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  March  27th,  1855,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed December  18th,  1856. 

"'"  750,  William  Carey  Jones  et  al.,  claimants  for  part  of  Las  Pulgas,  in  San  Mateo 
county,  granted  in  1835,  by  P.  V.  de  Sola  to  Luis  Arguello;  claim  filed 
March  2d,  1853,  and  discontinued  August  1st,  1854.     (See  No.  2.) 

"~  751,  414,  N.  D.  Clement  Panaud  et  al.,  claimants  for  Garden  of  San  Cayetano, 
1,000  by  200  varas,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  August  1845,  by  Pio 
Pico  to  Juan  B.  Alvarado;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  February  8th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  October  2d, 
1860. 

752,  385,  S.  D.     Clement  Panaud  et  al.,  claimants  for  Orchard  of  San  Jnan  Bau- 

tista,  400  varas  square,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  May  4th,  1846,  by  Pio 
Pico  to  Oliver  Deleisiguez ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  and  confirmed  by 
the  Commission  December  18th,  1855. 

753,  379,  S.  D.     Adolph  Canil  et  al.,  claimants  for  Arias  Rancho,  1  square  league, 

in  Monterey  county,  granted  December  10th,  1839,  by  Jose  Castro  to  Fran- 
cisco Arias;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  Feb- 
ruary 27th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court  June  l7th,  1859. 

"~"  754,  402,  N.  D.  Thomas  0.  Larkin,  claimant  for  Mission  Santa  Clara  Orchard, 
15  acres,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  June  30th,  1846,  by  Pio  Pico  to 
Juan  Castaneda,  Luis  Arenas  and  Benito  Dias ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853, 
rejected  by  the  Commission  December  18th,  1855,  and  by  the  District  Court 
May  21st,  1858. 


102  APPENDIX. 

755.     James  Stokes,  claimant  for  La  Natividad,  850  acres,  in  Monterey  county, 
granted  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Nicolas  Alviso  and  Manuel  Butron ;  claim 
/'■'^  filed  March  2d,  1853.     Discontinued.  ~     -_— ^ 

—  756.  Charles  Brown  et  al.,  claimants  for  4  square  leagues,  in  Napa  county,  granted 
in  1834,  by  Hijar,  styled  Governor,  to  C.  Brown  et  al. ;  claim  filed  March 
2d,  1853.     Discontinued. 

757,  388,  N.  D.  Nicolas  Berreyesa,  claimant  for  Las  Milpitas,  in  Santa  Clara 
county,  under  a  decree  signed  by  Pedro  Chaboya,  first  Alcalde  of  the  Ayun- 
tamiento  of  San  Jose  of  May  6th,  1834,  to  N.  Berreyesa  ;  claim  filed  March 
2d,  1853,  and  rejected  by  the  Commission  October  16th,  1855. 

—  758,  377,  S.  D.  James  Stokes,  claimant  for  3  suertes,  in  Monterey  county, 
granted  January  2d,  1843,  by  Jose  R.  Estrada,  Prefect  of  the  First  District, 
to  Jose  C.  Boronda;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission October  2d,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution 
December  22d,  1856. 

759,  369,  N.  D.  John  A.  Sutter,  claimant  for  Town  of  Sutter,  in  Sacramento 
county;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  July  17th, 
1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  February  23d,  1857. 

r^  760,  333,  N.  D.  Thaddeus  M.  Leavenworth,  claimant  for  part  of  Agua  Caliente,  in 
Sonoma  county,  granted  July  13th,  1840,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Lazaro 
Pina;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April 
24th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed 
April  3d,  1857  ;  containing  320.33  acres. 


761,  260,  N.  D.  Robert  Hopkins,  claimant  for  part  of  Entre  Napa,  80  acres,  in 
Napa  county,  granted  May  9th,  1836,  by  Mariano  Chico  to  Nicolas  Higuera; 
claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  January  30th,  1855, 
and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April  21st,  1856. 


762,  258,  N.  D.,  255.     Oliver  Boulio,  claimant  for  part  of  Cabeza  dc  Santa  Rosa, 

640  acres,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  September  30th,  1841,  by  Manuel 
Jimeno  to  Maria  Ignacia  Lopez;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by 
the  Commission  January  30th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of 
prosecution  April  21st,  1856. 

763,  169,  N.  D.,  200.     John  E.  Brown,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  110  acres,  in 

Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Sal- 
vador Vallejo ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
September  5th,  1854,  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857,  and  appeal  dis- 
missed March  21st,  1857. 


APPENDIX.  •        103 

764.     Charles  B.  Strode,  claimant  for  part  of  San_ Antonio,  5,000  acres,  in  Ala- 

imeda  county,  granted  by  P.  V.  de  Sola  and  Luis  Antonio  Arguello  to  Luis 
')         Peralta;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853.    Discontinued. 

•^  765.  Charles  B.  Strode,  claimant  for  part  of  San  Antonio,  lOjOOO  acres,  in  Ala- 
meda county,  granted  by  P.  V.  de  Sola  and  Luis  Antonio  Arguello  to  Luis 
Peralta;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853.     Discontinued. 

766,  248,  N.  D.,  39.  Victoria  D.  Estudillo  et  ah,  claimants  for  Temecula,  6 
square  leagues,  in  San  Diego  county,  granted  February  11th,  1835,  by  Jose 
Figueroa  to  Josd  Antonio  Estudillo;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected 
by  the  Commission  January  30th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure 
of  prosecution  April  21st,  1856. 


y^  .  767,  413,  N.  D.  Francisco  Rico  et  al.,  claimants  for  Rancheria  del  Rio  Estanislao, 
1 1  square  leagues,  in  San  Joaquin  and  Calaveras  counties,  granted  Decem- 
ber 29th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Francisco  Rico  and  Jos^  Anto- 
nio Castro;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  Oc- 
tober 16th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  November  10th,  1856,  and  appeal 
dismissed  April  1st,  1857  ;  containing  48,886.64  acres. 


768,  279,  N.  D.    Jose  Jesus  Berreyesa,  claimant  for  Yucuy,  8  square  leagues, 

near  Clear  Lake,  granted  May  29th,  1846,  by  Jose  de  los  Santos  Berreyesa 
to  J.  J.  Berreyesa ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
March  27th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April 
21st,  1856. 

769,  293,  S.  D.,  118.     Charles  Morse  et  al.,  claimants  for  La  Laguna  de  las  Cala- 

basas,  one  and  one-fourth  by  one-half  league,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted 
December  30th,  1833,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to  Felipe  Hernandez;  claim  filed 
March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  March  27th,  1855,  and  con- 
firmed by  the  District  Court  June  17th,  1858. 

^  770.  Martin  Murphy,  claimant  for  300  acres,  granted  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to 
Shelton;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  and  rejected  by  the  Commission 
March  27th,  1855.     Discontinued. 

771,  309,  N.  D.,  90.  Robert  Cathcart,  Administrator,  claimant  for  Sayente,  2  by 
1  league,  in  Santa  Cruz  county,  granted  October  1 833,  by  Jose  Figueroa  to 
Joaquin  Buelna;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission 
April  17th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April  28th, 
1856. 


772,  385,  N.  D.     A.  Randall,  claimant  for  2  square  leagues,  in  Marin  county, 
granted  March  17th,  1836,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  James  Richard  Berry; 


•'' 


7S 


104  APPENDIX. 

claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  September  11th, 
1855,  by  the  District  Court  December  28th,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed 
May  24th,  1858;  containing  8,887.68  acres.     Patented. 

773,  114,  N.  D.,  200.     L.  D.  Brown  et  al.,  claimants  for  part  of  Napa,  640  acres, 

in  Napa  county,  granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Sal- 
vador Vallejo  ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission 
April  11th,  1854,  and  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857. 

774,  263,  N.  D.     Paula  Sanchez  de  Valencia,  claimant  for  Buri  Buri,  two-tenths 

of  4  square  leagues,  in  San  Mateo  county,  granted  provisionally  by  Luis 
Antonio  Arguello  December  11th,  1827,  and  by  Jose  Castro  September 
23d,  1835,  to  Jos^  Sanchez;  claim  Bled  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  January  30th,  1855,  (confirmed  in  No.  97)  and  appeal  dis- 
missed for  failure  of  prosecution  April  21st,  1856. 

775,  325,  N.  D.     C.  P.  Stone,  claimant  for  part  of  Agua  Caliente,  300  acres,  in 

Sonoma  county,  granted  July  13th,  1840,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Lazaro 
Pifia;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April 
24th,  1855,  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857,  and  appeal  dismissed 
March  31st,  1857. 

776,  306,  N.  D.     Francis  J.  White,  claimant  for  300  acres,  in  Sacramento  county,- 

granted  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  John  A.  Sutter ;  claim  filed  March  2d, 
1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April  17th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed 
for  failure  of  prosecution  April  28th,  1856. 

777,  254,  N.  D.  Widow  and  heirs  of  Anastasio  Chabolla,  claimants  for  3  suertes, 
in  San  Jose,  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  in  1785  by  authority  of  the  King 
of  Spain  to  Mazario  Laez ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  January  30th,  1855  and  claim  dismissed  by  the  District  Court 

for  failure  of  prosecution  January  8th,  1858. 

778,  Barcelia  Bemal,  claimant  for  Embarcadero  de  Santa  Clara,  1,000  varas 
square,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  June  18th,  1848,  by  Pio  Pico  to  B. 
Bemal;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853.     Discontinued. 

779,  198,  N.  D.     Barcelia  Bernal,  claimant  for  1  square  league,  in  Santa  Clara 

county,  granted  in  1845  or  1846  by  the  Governor  of  California  to  B.  Bernal 
et  al.;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  and  rejected  by  the  Commission  March 
6th,  1855. 

~  780,  317,  N.  D.  Jose  Y.  Limantour,  claimant  for  Lupyomi,  11  square  leagues, 
granted  October  20th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Michel torena  to  Jose  Y.  Limantour; 
claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April  24th,  1855, 
and  by  the  District  Court  March  11th,  1857. 


APPENDIX.  105 

781,  311,  S.  T>.     Jose  Y.  Limantour,  claimant  for  Laguna  de  Tache,  11  square 

leagues,  granted  December  4th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Michcltorena  to  Jose  Y. 
Limantour;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April 
24th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  December  17th, 
1856. 

782,  314,  S.  D.     Jose  Y.  Limantour,  claimant  for  Cienega  del  Gabilan,  11  square 

leagues,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  October  26th,  1843,  by  Manuel  Mich- 
cltorena to  Antonio  Cliavis  ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  April  24th,  1855,  and  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  Febru- 
ary 4th,  1858. 

783,  321,  S.  D.     Jos6  Y.  Limantour,  claimant  for  Cajuenga,  6  square  leagues,  in 

Los  Angeles  county,  granted  February  7th,  1845,  by  Manuel  Michcltorena 
to  Jose  Y.  Limantour;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission April  24th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution 
December  17th,  1856. 

784,  307,  N.  D.     Jose  Y.  Limantour,  claimant  for  Ojo  de  Agua,  400  varas  square, 

near  the  Mission  of  San  Francisco  Solano,  granted  December  20th,  1844, 
by  Manuel  Michcltorena  to  Jose  Y.  Lifnantour;  claim  filed  March  2d, 
1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April  24th,  1855,  and  by  the  District 
Court  March  11th,  1857. 


785;  319,  S.  D.  Jose  Maria  Castafiares,  claimant  for  Arroyo  de  los  Calsoncillos, 
1 1  square  leagues,  in  Santa  Clara  county,  granted  December  28th,  1 843,  by 
Manuel  Michcltorena  to  J.  M.  Castanares;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853, 
rejected  by  the  Commission  April  24th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  fail- 
ure of  prosecution  February  12th,  1857. 

""  786,  310,  N.  D.  Victor  Prudon,  claimant  for  Bodega,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted 
July  15th,  1841,  by  M.  G.  Vallejo  to  V.  Prudon;  claim  filed  March  2d, 
1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April  24th,  1855,  and  by  the  District 
Court  March  17th,  1857. 

787.  W.  W.  Warner,  claimant  for  part  of  Nueva  Fl^ndria,  3  leagues  square, 
granted  in  1845  on  an  order  of  Manuel  Michcltorena  by  J.  A.  Sutter  to 
Juan  de  Swat ;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853,  and  rejected  by  the  Commission 
March  27th,  1855. 

-  788,' 340,  N.  D.  Justo  Larios  et  aL,  claimants  for  Carapo  de  los  Franceses,  granted 
in  1 844,  by  Manuel  Michcltorena  to  Guillermo  Gulnack ;  claim  filed  March 
2d,  1853,  and  rejected  by  the  Commission  April  24th,  1855. 

789,  339,  N.  D.  Agustin  Juan,  claimant  for  Campo  de  los  Franceses,  granted  in 
1 844,  by  Manuel  Micheltoreiia  to  Guillermo  Gulnack ;  claim  filed  March 


^  106  APPENDIX. 

2d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April  24th,  1855,  and  dismissed  by- 
claimant  March  20th,  1857. 

790,  296,  S.  D.     Widow  and  children  of  Simeon  Castro,  claimants  for  Tucho, 

800  varas  square,  in  Monterey  county,  granted  June  12th,  1841,  by  Juan  B. 
Alvarado  to  Simeon  Castro  ;  claim  filed  March  3d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the 
Commission  March  20th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  February  1st,  1858. 

791,  112,  N.  D,,  200.     H.  G.  Langley,  claimant  for  part  of  Napa,  in  Napa  county, 

granted  September  21st,  1838,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Salvador  Vallejo ; 
claim  filed  March  3d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  11th,  1854, 
and  by  the  District  Court  with  consent  of  the  U.  S.  District  Attorney  March 
2d,  1857. 

>-  792,  266,  N.  D.  Cyrus  Alexander,  claimant  for  part  of  Sotoyomi,  2  square 
leagues,  granted  September  28th,  1841,  by  Juan  B.  Alvarado  to  Henry  D. 
Fitch ;  claim  filed  March  3d,  1 853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  February 
8th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April  21st,  1856. 
(See  No.  16.) 

793,  303,  N.  D.  Sacramento  City,  claimant  for  land ;  claim  filed  March  3d,  1853, 
rejected  by  the  Commission  April  17th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  April 
21st,  1856. 

-.~  794,  247,  N.  D.  Salvador  Vallejo,  claimant  for  part  of  Lupyomi,  2  square 
leagues,  granted  September  5th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  S.  Vallejo 
and  Juan  Antonio  Vallejo ;  claim  filed  March  3d,  1853,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  January  30th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prose- 
cution April  21st,  1856.     (See  No.  507.) 

795,  356,  N.  D.     Peter  Scherreback,  claimant  for  800  varas  square,  in  San  Fran- 

cisco county,  granted  December  5th,  1845,  by  Mariano  Castro  to  P.  Scher- 
reback; claim  filed  March  3d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  November 
6th,  1855,  confirmed  by  the  District  Court  December  5th,  1859,  and  decree 
vacated  June  2d,  1860. 

796,  308,  S.  D.     Eulogio  de  Cells,  claimant  for  100  varas  square,  in  San  Diego 

county,  granted  in  1835  by  the  Ayuntamiento  of  the  town  of  San  Diego  to 
Juan  Maria  Osuna;  claim  filed  March  3d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commis- 
sion February  8th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution 
December  19th,  1856. 

797,  336,  N.  D.     William  M.  Fuller-,  claimant  for  part  of  Spulajule,  one  and  one- 

sixteenth  square  miles,  in  Marin  county,  granted  March  29th,  1 844,  by  Man- 
uel Micheltorena  to  Jose  Ramon  Mesa ;  claim  filed  March  3d,  1853,  rejected 
by  the  Commission  April  17th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of 
prosecution  February  23d,  1857. 


APPENDIX.  107 

798,  316,  N.  D.  Harriet  Besse,  claimant  for  part  of  Lassen's  Rancho,  in  Tehama 
county,  granted  December  26tli,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Peter 
Lassen ;  claim  filed  March  3d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April  17th, 
1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April  28th,  1856. 


K'  — •  799,  160,  N.  D.  Charles  E.  Hart,  claimant  for  part  of  Los  Carneros,  in  Solano 
county,  granted  May  9th,  1836,  by  Mariano  Chico  to  Nicolas  Higuera; 
claim  filed  March  3d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  August  1st,  1854, 
and  by  the  District  Court  March  2d,  1857. 


800,  256,  N.  D.  James  H.  Watmough,  claimant  for  part  of  Petaluma  grant,  one 
square  mile,  in  Sonoma  county,  granted  October  22d,  1 843,  by  Manuel 
Micheltorena  to  M.  G.  Vallejo ;  claim  filed  March  3d,  1853,  rejected  by  the 
Commission  January  30th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prose- 
cution April  21st,  1856. 


^  801,  296,  N.  D.     Reuben  M.  Hill,  claimant  for  part  of  Los  Carneros,  500  yards         '-"/.(^V 

square,  in  Napa  county,  granted  May  9th,  1836,  by  Mariano  Chico  to  Nic- 
olas Higuera;  claim  filed  March  3d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  Feb- 
ruary 27th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April 
21st,  1856. 


802,  282,  N.  D.  Sarah  Ann  Madie,  claimant  for  part  of  Los  Carneros,  in  Napa 
county,  granted  May  9th,  1836,  by  Mariano  Chico  to  Nicolas  Higuera; 
claim  filed  March  3d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  February  27th, 
1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April  21st,  1856. 


--  803,  365,  N.  D.  Edward  Wilson,  claimant  for  part  of  Los  Carneros,  in  Napa 
county,  granted  May  9th,  1836,  by  Mariano  Chico  to  Nicolas  Higuera; 

.  claim  filed  March  3d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  June  12th,  1855, 

and  appeal  dismissed  March  20th,  1857. 


804,  267,  N.  D.  John  Conn,  claimant  for  Locoyollome,  2  square  leagues,  in  Napa 
county,  granted  in  1845,  by  Jos6  de  los  Santos  Berreyesa,  first  Alcalde  of 
the  District  of  Sonoma,  to  John  Rainsford;  claim  filed  March  2d,  1853, 
rejected  by  the  Commission  February  8th,  1855,  and  appeal  dismissed  for 
failure  of  prosecution  April  21st,  1856. 


805,  334,  S.  D.  Jose  Antonio  Aguirre,  claimant  for  one-half  of  Isl%pd  Santa 
Cruz,  in  Santa  Barbara  county,  granted  May  22d,  1839,  by  Juan  B.  Alva- 
rado  to  Andres  Castilleros,  under  an  alleged  sale  from  Castillero,  (see  No. 
176 j;  claim  filed  March  3d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  June  5th, 
1855,  and  dismissed  by  claimant  March  4th,  1858. 


108  APPENDIX. 

806,  187,  N.  D.     Jos6  Santos  Bcrreyesa,  claimant  for  200  by  300  varas,  in  So- 

noma county,  granted  May  30th,  1846,  by  Joaqxiin  Carrillo  to  J.  S.  Bcr- 
reyesa;  claim  filed  March  3d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  October 
17th,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April  21st,  1856. 

807,  197,  N.  D.     Milton  Little,  claimant  for  5  square  leagues,  in  Monterey  county, 

granted  in  1844  or  1845,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Josefa  Martinez; 
claim  filed  March  3d,  T§S3,  rejected  by  the  Commission  April  17th,  1855, 
and  by  the  District  Court  June  1st,  1858.  Rejected  again  on  rehearing, 
July  6th,  1858. 

808,  180,  S.  D.     John  Foster  et  al.,  claimants  for  Mission  of  San  Juan  Capistrano, 

in  Los  Angeles  county,  granted  December  6th,  1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  J. 
Foster  and  J.  McKinley ;  claim  filed  March  3d,  18^3,  rejected  by  the  Com- 
mission August  1st,  1854,  and  appeal  dismissed  by  claimant  February  8th, 
1858. 


809,  158,  N.  D.     R.  S.  Kilburn,  claimant  for  1,500  acres,  granted  to  Manuel  Baca; 

claim  filed  March  3d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  August  1st,  1854, 
and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April  21st,  1856. 

810,  108,  N.  D,     N.  Coombs,  claimant  for  part  of  Entre  Napa,  in  Napa  county, 

granted  May  9th,  1836,  by  Mariano  Chico  to  Nicolas  Higuera;  claim  filed 
March  3d,  1853,  confirmed  by  the  Commission  April  11th,  1854,  and  by  the 
District  Court  March  30th,  1861. 


811,  251,  N.  D.     W,  H.  Davis  et  al.,  claimants  for  200  varas  square,  in  San  Fran- 

cisco county,  granted  in  1835,  by  Jose  Castro  to  Jose  Joaquin  Estudillo; 
claim  filed  March  3d,  1853,  rejected  by  the  Commission  February  6th,  1855, 
and  appeal  dismissed  for  failure  of  prosecution  April  21st  1856. 

812,  James  A.  Shorb  et  al.,  claimants  for  Arroyo  de  San  Antonio,  3  square 
leagues,  granted'  October  8th,  1844,  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  to  Juan 
Miranda;  claim  filed  March  3d,  1853,  and  discontinued  February  6th,  1855. 

813,  428,  N.  D.     Juan  M.  Luco,  claimant  for  Ulpinos,  granted  December  4th, 

1845,  by  Pio  Pico  to  Jose  de  la  Rosa;  claim  filed  September  13th,  1854, 
by  virtue  of  an  Act  of  Congress  of  April  17th,  1854,  the  two  years  within 
which  claims  might  be  presented  having  elapsed,  rejected  by  the  Commis- 
sion September  25th,   1855,  by  the  District  Court  June  26th,   1858,  and 

judgment  afiirmed  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court,  23  Howard,  615. 

« 

By  the  law  of  Congress  of  March  3d,  1851,  the  Commission  was  to  act  during 
three  years  from  the  passage  of  the  law,  and  the  claims  not  presented  within  two 
years  from  the  date  of  the  Act,  were  to  be  considered  part  of  tlie  public  domain. 


APPENDIX.  109 

By  the  law  of  January  18th,  1854,  the  time  within  which  the  Commission  was 
to  act,  was  extended  one  year  more  from  the  third  of  March,  1854,  and  by  the  law 
'    of  the  tenth  of  January,  1855,  the  time  was  again  extended  one  year  more  from       a 
the  third  of  March,  1855.  ^  AA^dJ^ 

m  Commission  adjourned,  March  1st,  1856.  --  7  ^  J  / 


4^)f^ 


JIMENO  INDEX. ,.  ^^ . .       . 

As  to  the  importance  of  the  registry  of  a  grant  in  the  Jimeno  Index,  the  United 
States  Court  in  the  case  of  the  United  States  v.  West's  Heirs,  in  22  Howard,  315, 
say:— 

"  We  do  not  regard  the  catalogue  of  grants  as  authoritative  proof  of  grants 
enumerated  in  it,  or  as  a  conclusive  exclusion  of  grants  not  so  registered  by 
Jimeno,  which  may  be-alleged  to  have  been  made  whilst  California  was  a  part  of 
the  Mexican  Republic,  though  they  may  bear  date  within  the  time  to  which  that 
Index  relates,  but  in  this  case  it  may  be  referred  to  as  an  auxiliary  memorandum 
made  by  Jimeno  himself  of  his  action  upon  the  petition  of  West." 

No  grant  presented  to  the  Commission  seems  to  correspond  to  the  following 
numbers : 

In  the  Jimeno  Index— Nos.  12,  22,  28,  42,  44,  47,  48,  52,  53,  56,  57,  63,  65,  68, 
73,  76,  78,  89,  93,  96,  97,  98,  99,  101,  104,  106,  107,  112,  11.5,  116,  117,  119,  120, 
123,  132,  134,  137,  138,  146,  158,  161,  165,  170,  173,  178,  183,  183,  199,  206,  213, 
219,  232,  242,  258,  263,  269,  287,  323,  368,  373,  374,  378,  379,  383,  386,  388,  392, 
399,  401,  427,  428  and  429. 

Grants  refused— Nos.  2,  3,  8,  32,  83,  38,  40,  41,  43,  59,  62,  66,  67,  74,  83,  84,  85, 
86,  103. 

In  the  Hartnell  Index— Nos.  435,  440,  445,  447,  448,  450,  460,  466,  469,  471, 
477,  480,  486,  487,  505,  509,  515,  516,  517,  518,  526,  533,  535,  538,  539,  540,  543, 
561,  567,  568,  57.3,  574  and  576. 

Grants  appearing  to  be  in  Lower  California— Nos.  482,  489,  490,  492,  497,  498, 
500,  502,  555,  556,  557,  564. 

The  above  grants,  in  Upper  California,  are  supposed  not  to  have  been  presented 
to  the  Commission,  but  by  a  more  diligent  search  some  of  the  above  numbers 
might  be  found  to  correspond  to  the  grants  presented. 


INDEX. 


INDEX  TO  RANCHOS 


^  Abrevadero,  Llano  del 149 

^  Acalanes 14 

Agua  Caliente,  Monterey  county  ...  20 
"  "        Alameda  county ... .   78 

"  "        San  Diego  county..  .254 

"  "        Olvera 428. 

"  "        Carrillo 498- 

"  "        Hooker 739 

Vallejo 74L 

"  "        Leavenworth 760 

Stone 775 

Plande 58 

Plande 59 

Agua  Hedionda 41 1 

Agua  Puerca  y  las  Trancas 209 

Aguaje  del  Centinela 381 

Aguajito,  Monterey  county 597 

Aguajito,  Santa  Cruz  county 678 

Aguas  Frias 227 

Aguas  Nieves 201 1 

Aguilas,  Real  de  las 628 

Alameda,  Arroyo  del 82 

Alamitos 404 

Alamo,  Pintado  el 309 

Alamos,  los 324 

Alamos,  los  y  Agua  Caliente,  Olvera.428 
"  "  "  Carillo.498 

Albion 103 

Alcatraz  Island 549 

Alisal  Bernal 668 

Alisal  Hartnell 264 

Alisos,  Canada  de  los 431 

Almaden,  New 366 

Americanos,  Rio  de  los 321 

Angeles,  Los 408 

Angeles  Los,  Island 18 

H 


Angeles,  los.  City  of 422 

Animas,  las,  or  Sitio  de  la  Brea 161 

Animas,  las,  Santa  Cruz  county 333 

Animas,  las.  Whiting 653 

Animas,  las.  Murphy 748 

Animas,  Rio  de  las 575 

Alio  Nuevo,  Punta  del 315 

Aptos 620 

Arias,  Rancho 753 

Archbishop 609 

Aromitas,  los,  y  Agua  Caliente 20 

Arastradero 696 

Arroyo  Chico 143  / 

Arroyo  Chico 651  f 

Arroyo  de  San  Antonio,  Valentine,.  45 

Shorb 812 

Arroyo  de  la  Laguna  (See  Errata) . .  42 

Arroyo  de  San  Antonio,  White 558 

Arroyo  de  San  Francisquito,  Rincon- 

adadel 238 

Arroyo  del  Rodeo 592 

Arroyo  del  Alameda 82 

'<         "         "         83 

Arroyo,  la  Purisima 359 

Arroyo  de  las  Nueces  y  Bolbones. .  .168 

"      los  Pilarcitos 354 

"      los  Calsoncillos 785 

"       Parajedel 268 

Arroyo  Seco,  Monterey  county 186   V 

Arroyo  Seco,  Sacramento,  Amador       / 

and  San  Joaquin  counties 444 

Arroyo  Grande 162 

Asuncion,  la 588 

Auras 53 

Atascadero,  Haight 211 

Atascadero,  Ortega 623 


114 


INDEX    TO    RANCHOS. 


Ausaymas 63 

Ayoska,  Rio 193 

Azusa,  San  Bernardino  Co 364 

Azusa,  Los  Angeles  Co 374 

Ballona 369 

Baqucros,  Canada  de  los 79 

Baranca  Colorada 185 

Bartolo  Viejo,  Paso  de 373 

Baulines,  las 541 

Baulinas  114 

.Berendos,  Rio  de  los 122 

Bluclier 24 

Boca  de  Santa  Monica 445 

Boca  de  la  Playa 482 

Boca  de  la  Canada  del  Pinole 490 

Bodega,  Smith 23 

Bodega,  Pmdon , 786 

Boga 129 

Bolbones,  Arroyo  de  las 168 

Bolsa  de  San  Felipe 65 

"       San  Cayetano,  Vallejo 85 

"       San  Cayetano,  A.  M.  Pico. 689 

"       Tomales 205 

"       Chemisal 312 

"       de  las  Escorpinas 355 

Bolsa  del  Pajaro,  Rodriguez 187 

Watson 634 

Bolsa  Nueva  y  Moro  Cojo 606 

Bolsa  Chica  la 405 

Bolsas  del  Potrero  y  Moro  Cojo 138 

Bolsas  del  Hambre,  las 204 

Bolsas,  las,  Yorba 402 

Bolsas,  las,  Morillo 459 

'  Bosquejo 182 

Bracocha 648 

Brea,  la 487 

Brea,  Sitio  de  la 161 

Briesgau 626 

Buacocha 648 

Buena  Esperanza 54 

Buena vista,  Monterey  county 153 

"  Llano  de 518 

"  San  Diego  county 618 

Bueyes,  Rincon  de  los 409 

Buriburi,  Sanchez 97 

"       Valencia 774 

Butano 627 

Cabeza  de  Santa  Rosa,  J.  Carillo . . .  643 


Cabeza  de  Santa  Rosa,  Mayer 644 

"  Eldridge  ....  645 

"  E.  Carrillo..646 

"  Mallagh 647 

"  Hendley 659 

"  Boulio 762 

Cahuenga,  Alexander 465 

"  Morchon 675 

"  Limantour 783 

Cajon,  el 262 

Cajon  de  Muscupiabe 380 

Cajon  de  los  Negros 413 

Cajon  de  Santa  Ana 440 

Cajuenga,  Limantour 783 

"         Alexander • 465 

"         Morchon 675 

Calabasas,  Laguna  de 769 

Calaveras,  las 602 

Calera,  la,  or  Las  Positas 221 

Callayomi 40 

Calleguas 430 

Calsoncillos,  Arroyo  de  los 785 

Camajal  y  El  Palomar 253 

Camaritos 629 

Campo  de  los  Franceses,  Weber 255 

"  "         "  Larios 788 

Juan 789 

Camulos 491 

Canada  de  Pogolomi 19 

"  Raymundo 21 

"  Herera 84 

"  los  Vuqueros 79 

"  la  Jonive 86 

Canada  Larga  6  Verde 118 

Canada  de  Capay 180 

Enmedio 169 

Cebada 169 


Ca] 


ada  del  Hambre 204 

'  de  los  Osos  Pecho  y  Islay.  .218 

'      delos  Osos 703 

'      del  Chorro. 220 

'      de  Salsipuedes 222 

'      de  San  Miguelito 242 

*       del  Diablo 242 

'      del  Rincon 283 

'      del  Corte  de  Madera 306 

'      La 317 

'      del  Pinole. 490 

'      dePalomia 325 

'  de  San  Felipe  y  las  Animas.  333 


INDEX   TO   RANCHOS. 


115 


Canada  dc  la  Segunda 554 

"      dc  Vcrdc  y  Arroyo  de  la  Pu- 

risima 359 

"      de  los  Nogalcs ..360 

"      de  Santa  Ana 387 

"      de  los  Alisos 431 

"      de  San  Vinccnte 426 

"       de  los  Coches 488 

"       de  los  Pinacatcs 598 

"       del  Corral 519 

"       de  los  Pinos 609 

"       dePala 617 

"       de  la  Carpcnteria 650 

"       de  Guadalupe  Viscitacion  y 

Rodeo  Vicjo 142 

"      de  Guadalupe,  Eaton 142 

Ridley 670 

"  "  Payson 745 

"      de  los  Capitancillos 744 

340 

Cafion  el  Primer 122 

\  Capay,  Soto 157 

Capay,  Reading 212 

Capay,  Canada  de 180 

Capitancillos,  los 340 

Capitancillos,  Canada  de  los 744 

Carbonera,  la 210 

Carmel 89 

Carmel,  el.  Mission  Church  property.609 

Carne  Humana 166 

Carneros,  los,  Littlejohn 665 

"  Anzar 680 

•         "  Hart 799 

Hill 801 

"  Madie 802 

Wilson 803 

Carneros,  Rinconada  de  los 323 

Carpenteria,  Canada  de  la 650 

Casmalia 553 

Caslamayome 326 

Castac 536 

Catacula 197 

Catholic  Church  property 609 

Cayama ; 120 

Caymus 243 

Cayucos 529 

Cazadores 303 

Cebada,  Canada  de 169 

Centinela,  Aguage  del 381 

Cerritos,  los 351 


Ccrritos,  Potrero  dc  los 258 

Chamisal 540 

Chemisal,  Bolsa  de 312 

Chimiles 202 

Cholam 98 

Chorro,  Canada  del 220 

Chualar 154 

Church  (Catholic)  property 609 

Cienega  6  Paso  dc  la  Tigera,  Sanchez.427 
"  "  "  Aguilar.458 

Cienega,  la 576 

Cienega  del  Gabilan 782 

Cienega  de  los  Paicines 596 

Cienegas,  las 372 

Cienega  de  las  Ranas 406 

Ciencguita 328 

City  of  Sonoma 237 

"       San  Francisco 280 

"       San  Jose 286 

"       San  Jose,  White  &  Brenham .  287 

"       Los  Angeles 422 

"       Santa  Barbara 543 

"       San  Diego 589 

"       Sacramento 633 

"       Sonora 639 

"       Monterey 714 

"       San  Luis  Obispo 738 

Coches,  los,  Sunol 167 

"  Soboranes 599 

Coches,  Canada  de  los. , 488 

Collayomi 40 

College  Rancho,  Church  property . .  609 

Coins,  Rancho  de 144 

Coluses,  los 658 

Concepcion,  Punta  de  la 327 

Conejo 135 

Consumnes,  Rancho  de  los 523 

^Consumnes 228 

Copay 212 

Copay,  Canada  de 180 

Corral  de  Tierra,  San  Francisco  Co.  164 

Monterey  Co 170 

San  Mateo  Co 594 

Corral  de  Quati 189 

Piedra 190 

Padilla 615 

Corral,  Canada  del 519 

Corralitos,  los 174 

Corte  de  Madera,  el 36 

"  de  Novato 223 


116 


INDEX    TO    RANCHOS. 


Cortc  de  Madera,  Canada  de 306 

"  del  Presidio 497 

''  Cosumnes 228 

Cosumnes,  Rancho  de  los 523 

Cotate 350 

Coyotes,  los 400 

Cuati,  Corral  de 189 

Cuati,  Huerta  de 455 

Cuca 471 

Cucamonga 370 

Cuyama,  De  la  Guerra 67 

"       120 

Cuyamaca 375 

De  los  Feliz 416 

Del  Paso 146 

Diablo,  Canada  del 242 

Diablo,  Rincon  del 462 

Dolores,  Mission,  Church  property. .  609 

"  "        Bolton 81 

Dos  Pueblos 517 

El  Norte 389 

Embarcadero  de  Santa  Clara 516 

778 

Encinal  y  Buena  Esperanza 54 

Encinitos,  los 395 

Encino 379 

Enmedio,  Canada  de 169 

Entre  Napa,  Martin 323 

"  Thompson 334 

"  Vallejo 337 

Walker 578 

"  Bailey 580 

"  Mount 581 

"  Green 585 

"  Patchell 586 

"  Higuera 587 

"  Hopkins 761 

"  Coombs 810 

"  Kilburn 728 

Escorpinas,  Bolsa  de  las 355 

Escorpion,  el 392 

Espiritu  Santo,  Loma  del 539 

Esquon 183 

Estanislao,  Rio  del 767 

Estero  Americano 136 

Esteros,  Rincon  de  los,  Alvisu 278 

"  "  "       Berreyesa.  ..277 

"  "        White 292 

Estrella,  la 663 


Farrallones  Island 549 

Varwell,  Rancho  de 651 

Felis,  de  los 416 

Feliz,  Rancho 53 

Flores,  las 700 

Flores,  Rancho  de  las 150 

Tlugge's  Rancho  or  Boga 129 

664 

Francas  and  Jalapa 717 

Gabilan,  Cienega  de 782 

Gallinas,  las 72 

663 

Gardens,  Church  property 609 

Garden,  San  Cayetano 751 

Gatos,  Rinconada  de  los 386 

Gatos,  los 531 

German 199 

Gentiles,  Laguna  de  los 326 

Goleta,  la 520 

Guadalasca 31 

Guadalupe 66 

"        Llanito  de  los  Coreos 152 

"         Mining  Co 744 

"         Canada  de,  Eaton 142 

Ridley 670 

Payson 745 

Guajome 481 

Guenoc 12 

Guesesosi 203 

Guejito 325 

Guilicos 32 

Habra,  la 401 

Hambre,  Canada  de 204 

Herera,  "  84 

*Honcut,  Butte  Co 159 

"^Honcut,  Yuba  Co 147 

Huasna 363 

Huecos,  los 282 

Huerhuero 87 

Huerta  de  Romaldo 50 

Huertas,  las 322 

Huerta  de  Cuati 455 

Huichicha 165 

Isla  de  Santa  Catalina 547 

Isla  de  la  Yegua 307 

Island  at  San  Diego 188 

Island,  Mare 307 


INDEX   TO    RANCHOS. 


117 


Island  of  Ycrba  Bucna,  Limantour. .  549 

"     Polack 11 

"        Santa  Rosa,  Jones 117 

"        Santa  Cruz,  Castillcro 176 

"  "      Aguire 805 

^      "        Sacramento 294 

711 

"        Santa  Catalina 547 

Islands,  Farralloncs 549 

Island,  Los  Angeles 18 

Island  of  Alcatraz 549 

Islay 218 

Jacinto 156 

Jacinto  Viejo  y  Nuevo 116 

Jalapa 717 

Jamaclio 442 

Jamual 407 

Jesus  Maria 528 

Jesus  Maria,  Rio  de 261 

^  Jimeno  Rancho 131 

^  Johnson's  Rancho 91 

Jonata,  San  Carlos  de 534 

Jonive,  Canada  de  la 86 

Jota,  la 160 

Juntas,  las  Swanson 127 

Juntas,  las  Peralta 301 

Juristac 62 

Jurupa,  Bandini 361 

Jurupa,  Roubideau 463 

-La  Paz 396 

Lac 611 

Laguna  de  San  Antonio .  .^ 44 

"  Santos  Calle 70 

"         la  Merced 102 

Laguna,  la,  Santa  Barbara  Co 217 

"        Punta  de  la 121 

"        la,  San  Diego  Co 346 

"        la.  Church  property 609 

"        de  los  Gentiles 326 

"        de  los  Palos  Colorados 590 

"        Seca,  Monterey  Co 155 

"'       Seca,  Bull 244 

"        Seca,  Alvirez 713 

"        de  las  Calabasas 769 

"        de  Tache,  Limantour 781 

"        de  Tache,  Castro 600 

"        de  Tache,  Clark 601 

Larga,  Canada 118 


Larkin's  Rancho 130 

^Lassen's  Rancho 798 

Laureles,  los,  Boronda 1 533 

"  Ransom 610 

Liebre,  la 429 

Llagas,  las 25 

Llajomc 194 

Llanito  de  los  Correos 152 

Llano  de  Santa  Rosa,  Carrillo 252 

Miller 288 

Hendley 499 

Llano  del  Abrevadero 149 

Llano  de  Mallacomes — See  Seno  de 
Mallacomes. 

Llano  del  Tequisquita 133 

Llano  Seco 289 

Llano  de  Buenavista 518 

Locoallomi 719 

Lobos,  Punta  de 515 

Locolloyome 804 

Loma  del  Espiritu  Santo 539 

Lomas  de  la  Purification 266 

Lomas  de  Santiago 421 

Lomerias  Muertas 132 

Lompoc 15 

Los  Angeles  Island 18 

Los  Angeles,  City  of 422 

Los  Angeles 408 

Lots — See  note  at  the  end  of  Index.  ,■ 

Lupyomy,  Limantour 780 

Vallejo 794 

"  Teschemacher 507 

Malacomes  Seno  deorMoristal,  Cook. 657 

"         Berreyesa 58 

Rockwell 59 

Malpitas,  las 757 

Mare  Island 307 

Mariposas,  las,  Fremont 1 

"  Voss 10 

Matzultaquea 676 

Medanos 616 

Medano 691 

Meganos,  los 213 

Melyo 436 

Merced,  la 347 

Merced,  Laguna  de  la 102 

Milpitas,  las 305 

Milpitas 141 

Milpitas 757 


118 


INDEX    TO    RANCIHOS. 


Milyo 436 

Mission  Santa  Clara  Orchard 754 

Missi©n  Vieja  de  S.  Gabriel  Potrero.408 
Mission  Dolores  or  San  Francisco  de 

Assis,  Church  property 609 

Mission  Dolores,  Bolton 81 

"      El  Carmel  or  San  Carlos,  Ch. 

property 609 

Mission  San  Antonio  de  Padua,  Ch. 

property 609 

Mission  La  Purisima,  Malo 476 

Mission  La  Purisima,  Ch.  property  .609 
"  Vieja  de  la  Purisima,  Carillo.l  78 
"  La  Solcdad,  Ch.  property. . .  609 
"  de  la  Soledad,  Soberanes . . .  526 
"  San  Buenaventura,  Ch.  prop. 609 
Poll...  .479 
"       San  Diego,  Ch.  property. .  .609 

"  "  Arguello 175 

"       San  Fernando,  Ch.  property. 609 

"  "  Cells 378 

"       San  F'co  Solano,  Ch.  prop. .  609 
"       San  Gabriel,  "  ..609 

"  "  Workman 574 

"  Workman 697 

"       San  Jos6,  Church  property  .609 

"  "        Andres  Pico 110 

"       San  Juan  Bautista,  Ch,  prop. 609 
"  "         Capistrano,     "       609 

"  "  "         Foster.  410 

'*  "  "         Foster.  808 

"       San  Luis  Obispo,  Ch.  prop. 609 
"  "  "         Wilson...  224 

"  "        Key,  Ch.  prop 609 

"       San  Miguel,  Ch.  property. . .  609 

'•  "  Rios ..622 

"       San  Rafael,  Ch,  property..  ,609 

"  "  Breed 295 

"       Santa  Barbara,  Ch.  prop . . .  609 
Den....... .621 

"  "      Clara,  Ch.  property.. 609 

"       Santa  Clara,  Arnas 687 

"  "  "       Galindo 313 

"  "      Cruz,  Ch.  property  . .  609 

"  "      Inez,  "  ..609 

"  "         "     CovaiTubias 538 

"       Vieja,  or  La  Paz 396 

Molino,  el,  or  Rio  Ayoska 193 

Molinos,  Rio  de  los., 106 

Molino,  cl 193 


Monserrate 625 

Monte  del  Diablo 76 

Monterey,  City  of. 714 

Moquelamo 357 

Moristal,  Berreyesa 58 

Moristal,  Rockwell 59 

Moristal,  Cook 657 

Moro  y  Cayucos 529 

Moro  Cojo 138 

Moro  Cojo 606 

Muniz 43 

Muscupiabe,  Cajon  de 380 

Muscupiabe 561 

Nacimiento,  El 663 

Nacion,  Rancho  de  la 460 

Nacional  Rancho 290 

Napa — See  Salvador's  Rancho  and 
Entre  Napa. 

Napa,  Inglu-am 720 

"      Harbin 721 

"      McCoombs 722 

"      Hart 723 

"      Coombs 724 

"      Farley 725 

"      Cornwell 726 

"      Truebody 727 

"      Kilburn 728 

"      Boggs 729 

"      McCoombs 730 

"      Wise 731 

"     Rose 732 

"      Osborn 733 

"     Bartlett 734 

"     Knight 735 

"     McNeil 736 

"     Ritchie 737 

"     Brown 763 

"     Brown 773 

"     Langley 791 

"      Thompson 4^5 

"      Boggs 500 

"     U.  Vallejo 510 

"     Love 582 

"     Keeiey 583 

"     McCorabs 577 

"      Horrel 579 

"      Frank 649 

"      McDonald 694 

"     or  Francas  and  Jalapa 717 


INDEX   TO   RANCHOS. 


119 


Natividad 565 

Natividad,  la 755 

Ncgros,  Cajon  dc  los 413 

Nemshas 196 

New  Almadcu 366 

^  New  Ilolvctia,  Gclston 6 

J.  A.  Sutter 92 

Covillaud 248 

Grimes 683 

"  J.  A.  Sutter 743 

White 776 

Nicasia,  Keynolds 259 

"       Halleck 270 

Nicasio,  Alvarado 684 

Nieto  Tract. 351,  400,  402,  404,  423,  459 

Niguel,  el 399 

Nipoma 9 

Noche  Bucna 702 

Nogales,  los 383 

Nogales,  Canada  de  los 360 

Nojoqui 492 

Novato 68 

Nueces,  Arroyo  de  los 168 

Nuestra  Senora  del  Refugio 5^ 

Nueva  Flandria,  Swat 655 

Nueva  Flandria,  Warner 787 

Nueva  Helvetia — See  New  Helvetia. 

Ojay 139 

Ojitos,  los 544 

Ojo  de  Agua  de  la  Coche 95 

Ojo  de  Agua  de  Figueroa 310 

Ojo  de  Agua 784 

Olompali 71 

^  Omochumne 173 

Orchard  of  Santa  Clara 742 

Orchard  of  San  Juan  Bautista 752 

Orchard,j_Sta  Clara  Mission,  Larkin..754 
"         Redman, 742 

Orchard  of  San  Cayetano 751 

Orestimba 35 

Osos,  Canada  de  los 218 

"      703 

Otay,  Dominguez 330 

Otay,  Estudillo 437 

Padilla,  Corral  de 615 

Paicines,  or  Cienega  de  los 596 

Pajaro,  el 635 

Pajaro,  Vega  del  Rio 279 


Pajaro,  Bolsa  dc 634 

Pala,  Canada  de 617 

Pala,  White 638 

Pala,  San  Diego  Co 348 

Pala,  Higuera 677 

Palomar,  el 253 

Palomia,  Canada  de 325 

Palos  Colorados,  Laguna  de  los  ... .  590 

Palos,  Yerde  los 446 

Pamo,  Vallc  de 332 

Panoclie  Grande 569 

Panocha  de  San  Juan 545 

Paraje  de  Sanchez 537 

Paraje  del  Arroyo 268 

Paso  de  la  Tigera 427 

''       "  "        458 

Paso,  Rancho  del 146 

Paso  de  Robles 241 

Paso  de  Bartolo  Viejo 373 

Pastoria  de  los  Borregas,  Murphy. . .   90 
Castro....  257 

Pauba     341 

Pauma 439 

Paz,  la 396 

Pecho 218 

Penacates,  Canada  de  los 598 

Penasquitos,  los 452 

Pescadero,  el,  Pico 267 

"  Grimes 293 

"  Santa  Cruz  Co 336 

"  Monterey  Co 564 

Petaluma,  Vallejo 250 

"         Watmough 800 

Piedra,  Blanca 302 

Pilarcitos,  Arroyo  de  los 354 

Pinos,  Canada  de  los 609 

Piuacates,  Canada  de  los 598 

Pinole 284 

Pinole,  Canada  del 490 

Pinos,  Punta  de,  Leese 353 

"        Pogue 563 

Piojo,  el 552 

Pismo   362 

Plan  de  Agua  Caliente 58 

Pleyto 567 

Plumas,  Rio  de  las 664 

Pogolomi,  Canada  de 19 

Point  Pinos 563 

Polka,  la 52 

Posa  de  los  Ositos 624 


120 


INDEX   TO    RANCHOS. 


Posas,  las 296 

Positas,  las,  Alameda  Co 77 

"  Santa  Barbara  Co 221 

Positos  de  las  Animas 125 

Posolmi 125 

Potrero 263 

Potrero  de  Santa  Clara 8 

"      Nuevo 30 

"      de  los  Cerritos 258 

"       de  San  Carlos 271 

"       de  San  Juan  Capistrano. . .  .394 
"       de  la  Mission  Vieja  de  San 

Gabriel 408 

Potrero  Grande 397 

"       de  Felipe  Lugo 432 

"      Fuentes 496 

''       de  San  Luis  Obispo 636 

"       de  San  Francisco,  Haro 101 

"  "  "  Jones 613 

"      and  Rincon  de  San  Pedro..  .747 

Primer  Canon,  el 122 

Providencia .338 

Puente,  la 385 

Puente  del  Monte,  Rincon  de  la 502 

Puerto,  Rancbo  del 509 

Pulgas,  las.  Ma.  Arguello 2 

"  Jones 750 

Smith 746 

"  Rowe 640 

J.  M.  Arguello 367 

Punta  de  la  Laguna,  la 121 

"      del  Ano  Nuevo 315 

"      de  la  Concepcion 327 

"      de  Pinos,  Leese 353 

"      de  Pinos,  Pogue 563 

"      Reyes 525 

*'      de  Lobos 515 

"      de  los  Reyes 666 

"      de  Quintin 740 

"      del  Tiburon 549 

Purisima,  Mission  Vieja  de  la 178 

"         Concepcion,  la 119 

"        la 476 

"        Arroyo  de  la 359 

"        Mission  la,  Cli.  property. .  609 

Putas,  las 236 

Putos,  los 57 

Putos,  Rio  de  los 230 

Quati,  Corral  de 189 


Quati,  Huerta  de 455 

Quesesosi 203 

Quicksilver  Mine 366 

"     744 

Quien  Sabe,  Santa  Clara  Co 22 

"  San  Joaquin  Co 55 

Quito 276 

Quintin,  Punta  de 740 

Raimundo,  Canada  de 21 

Ranas,  Cienega  de  las 406 

Rancheria  del  Rio  Estanislao 767 

Rancho — See  note  at  the  end  of  Index. 

Rancho  Arias 753 

"       deFarwell 651 

"       Lassens 798 

de  Coins 144 

"       de  Sausal 557 

"       de  la  Caiiada  de  Enmedio . .  169 

"       de  la  Nacion 460 

delasFlorcs 150 

"       de  los  Consumnes 523 

"       de  los  Vergeles 169 

del  Paso 146 

del  Puerto 509 

"       del  Refugio,  Santa  Cruz  Co.207 
Sta  Clara  Co..  257 

Nacional 290 

Salvador,  Love 582 

Rancho,  Salvador,  Keeley 583 

McCombs 577 

"  "  Horrel... 579 

Real  de  las  Aguilas 628 

Refugio,  Rancho  del,  Santa  Cruz  co.207 
"  "  Santa  Clara  co.257 

Refugio 214 

Reyes,  Punta  de 525 

Reyes,  Punta  de  los 666 

Rincon,  El,  Santa  Barbara  co 163 

Rincon,  E,l,  San  Bernardino  co 384 

Rincon  de  los  Esteros,  Alvisu 278 

"  "  "        Berreyesa.  ..277 

White 292 

Rincon  de  las  Salinas  y  Potrero  Nu- 
evo    30 

Rincon  de  las  Salinas 535 

Rincon  del  Alisal 73 

Rincon  de  la  Ballena 192 

Rincon  de  San  Francisquito 200 

Rincon  de  la  Brea 329 


INDEX    TO    RANCHOS. 


121. 


Rincon  do  los  Biieyes 409 

Kincoii  del  Diablo 462 

Rincon  do  la  Piiente  del  Monte 502 

Rincon  do  Musulacon 584 

Rincon,  Canada  del 283 

Rincon  do  San  Pedro 747 

Rinconada  del  Sanjon 532 

Rinconada  do  los  Carncros 323 

Rinconada  de  los  Gatos 386 

Rinconada  del  Arroyo  de  San  Eran- 

^    cisquito 238 

Rio  de  los  Molinos 106 

^  Rio  de  los-Berendos 122 

Rio  del  Pajaro,  Vega  del 279 

Rio  del  Stauislao 767 

Rio  Ayoska,  or  Ojotska 193 

Rio  de  Santa  Clai-a 225 

^  Rio  de  los  Putos ' 230 

^  Rio  de  Jesus  Maria 261 

Rio  de  los  Americanos 321 

Rio  de  las  Animas 575 

\  Rio  de  las  Plumas 664 

Roblar  de  la  Miseria 69 

Rodeo  Viejo 142 

"  "     745 

Rodeo,  Arroyo  del 592 

Rosa  de  Castilla 371 

Rosa  Morada 56 

Romaldo,  Huerta  de 50 

Saca,  La 265 

^  Sacramento 311 

^  Sacramento  City 633 

"    793 

'^  Sacramento,  Island  of,  Noe 294 

'  "        Prudon 711 

Sagrada  Familia 138 

Salinas 570 

Salsipuedes,  Canada  de 222 

Salsipuedes '. 527 

Salvador's  Ranclio,  Love 582 

"•  "  Keeley 583 

*'  "         McCombes 577 

"  "  Horrel 579 

^  Sancos,  los ... . 107 

Sanel 300 

Sanjon  de  Santa  Rita 673 

Sanjon  de  Moquelumnes 393 

San  Agustin 208 

San  Andres 566 

I 


San  Antonio,  Santa  Barbara  county. . :     ^ 
''  Santa  Clara  county. . .!    ) 

"  A.  M.  Pcralta i    3  -- 

Y.  Peralta ^4  - 

D.  &  V.  Peralta 4 

"  Lugo .'    S 

"  or  el  Pescadero ■  ■    i 

Baldez <;    \ 

"  Mission  Cli.  property. .'     ) 

Den (    ^  • 

"  Dana G  - 

"  Dana 7 

Weeks 7  S  - 

"  Curtis :    9- 

White :    a  - 

"  Strode '    I  - 

"  Strode '    5  v 

"  Laguna  de Av 

"  Arroyo  de,  Valentine. .     5  *' 

"  Arroyo  de.  White ■:   8  ^ 

"  Arroyo  de,  Shorb 2  • 

San  Benito '-'.  2 

San  Bernab6,  White 3 

Cocks :V' 

San  Bernardino •  :  6 

San  Bernardo,  San  Luis  Obispo  co...    3 
"  San  Diego  county.  .A   4 

"  Monterey  county. . . . ;    1 

San  Buenaventura S 

San  Buenaventura,  Mission  Church 

property K   9 

San  Buenaventura,  Mission,  Poll, . .-    9 

San  Carlos  de  Jonata 4 

San  Carlos,  Potrero  de 1 

San  Carlos,  Mission  Church  prop'ty.     9 

San  Cayetano,  Orchard  of '.    1 

San  Cayetano,  Bolsa  de,  Vallejo. . .      5 
"  "         A.M. Pico. (    9 

San  Diego  Mission,  Arguello 15 

San  Diego  Mission  Church  property.'    3 

San  Diego,  City  of •    9 

San  Dieguito 1. 

San  Emidio 3 

San  Eelipe 4 

San  Eelipe,  Bolsa  de 3 

San  Eelipe,  Valle  de . . . . , I 

San  Eelipe,  Canada  de,  y  las  Animas. •;  '3 

San  Eernando  Mission,  Cells ■    S 

San  Eernando,  Mission  Church  prop- 
erty   ;    J 


122 


INDEX  TO  RANCHOS. 


San  Francisco 318 

San  Francisco,  City  of 280 

San  Francisco,  Solano,  Mission  Ch. 

property 609 

San  Francisco  do  Asis,  Mission  Ch. 

property 609 

San  Francisco  de  las  Llagas 25 

San  Francisco,  Potrero  de 101 

"  "         613 

San  Francisquito,  Los  Angeles  co.  .331 
"             "               Monterey  county.  595 
"             "               Santa  Clara  co . . .  642 
San  Gabriel,  Mission  Courch  prop- 
erty  609 

San  Gabriel  Mission,  Workman 574 

San  Gabriel  Potrero 408 

San  Gabriel,  White 415 

San  Gabriel  Mission,  Workman 697 

San  Geronimo,  San  Luis  Obispo  co..  61 
"  Marin  county. ...... 667 

San  Gregorio,  Castro   358 

"  Roubideau 443 

"  Buelna 542 

San  Isidro 630 

112 

San  Jacinto,  Colusi  co 156 

San  Jacinto,  San  Diego  co 115 

San  Jacinto  y  San  Gregorio 443 

San  Jacinto  Viejo  y  Nucvo 116 

San  Jacinto  Nu.evo  and  Potrero 263 

San  Joaquin  or  Rosa  Morada 56 

San  Joaquin 406 

San  Jos6,  Marin  co 198 

"  Palomares 365 

"  Vejar 388 

San  Jos6  City 287 

286 

San  Jose  de  Gracia 38 

San  Jos6,  Valle  de,  Alameda  co.  . .  .231 

"  "       Warner 254 

"  "       Hortilla 469 

San  Jose  de  Buenos  Ayres 368 

San  Jos6  y  Sur  Chiquita 546 

San   Jose,    Mission.  Church    prop- 
erty   609 

San  Jos6  Mission,  Pico 110 

"^  San  Juan 181 

San  Juan  Cajon  de  Santa  Ana 440 

San  Juan  Bautista 75 

San  Juan  Bautista,  Orchard 752 


San  Juan  Bautista,  Mission  Church 
property 609 

San  Juan  Capistrano,  Mission,  Foster.808 

San  Juan  Capistrano,  Mission  Church 

property 609 

San  Juan  Capistrano  del  Camote . . .  304 
San  Juan  Capistrano,  Potrero  de. .  .394 

San  Julian 13 

San  Justo 47 

San  Justo  el  Viejo 99 

San  Leandro 256 

San  Lorenzo,  Castro 285 

"  Soberanes 505 

Soto 524 

Randall 555 

"  Sanchez 674 

San  Lucas 530 

San  Luis  Gonzaga 37 

San  Luis  Obispo,  Potrero  de 636 

San  Luis  Obispo,  City  of 738 

San  Luis  Obispo,   Mission   Church 

property 609 

San  Luis  Obispo  Mission,  Wilson.. 224 
San  Luis  Rey,  Mission  Church  prop- 
erty  609 

San  Luis  Rey  and  Pala 348 

San  Luisito 137 

San  Marcos 299 

San  Mateo,  Howard 559 

"  Sanchez 672 

San  Miguel,  San  Francisco  co . .  .-^. . .   17 

"  Sonoma  co 251 

"  Mission  Church  prop'ty.609 

San  Miguel  Mission,  Rios 622 

San  Miguel,  Santa  Barbara  co 472 

San  Miguelito  de  Trinidad 27 

San  Miguelito 314 

215 

216 

"  Caiiadade 242 

San  Pablo,  Castro 390 

"  Jones 686 

San  Pascual,  Foster 272 

"  Garfias 345 

San  Pedro,  Marin  co 72 

"  San  Mateo  co 352 

"  Los  Angeles  co 480 

"      398 

"  Santa  Barbara  co 512 


INDEX   TO   RANCHOS. 


123 


San  Pedro,  Rincon  and  Potrero  de.  .747 

San  Rafael  Mission,  Breed 295 

San  Rafael,  Mission  Church  prop'ty .  609 

403 

San  Ramon,  Alameda  co 128 

"  San  Luis  Obispo  co. .  .102 

"  Pacheco 179 

D.  ^Peralta 301 

Norris 349 

San  Simeon 504 

San  Vincente,  Canada  de 426 

"  Monterey  co 145 

"  Los  Angeles  co 457 

"  Santa  Clara  co 503 

Rodriguez 568 

"  Escarilla 608 

San  Ysidro 630 

112 

Sancos,  Los 107 

Sanel 300 

Sanjones 151 

Sanjon  de  Santa  Rita 673 

Sanjon  de  los  Moqueluranes 393 

Sanjon,  Rinconada  del 532 

Santa  Ana,  Canada  de 387 

Santa  Ana  del  Chino 434 

433 

Santa  Ana,  Cajon  de  440 

"  Santa  Clara  co 22 

Santa  Ana  j  Santa  Anita 275 

Santa  Ana,  Santa  Barbara  co 494 

Santa  Anita,  Los  Angeles  co 343 

"  San  Joaquin  CO .    275 

Santa  Barbara,  Mission  Church  prop- 
erty .... . 609 

Santa  Barbara,  City  of 543 

Santa  Barbara  Mission,  Den 621 

Santa  Barbara  Island 547 

Santa  Catalina  Island 547 

Santa  Clara,  Potrero  de 8 

Santa  Clara,  Enibarcadero  de 516 

"       778 

"  Mission,  Arnas 687 

Santa  Clara  Mission,  Orchard,  Lar- 

kin 754 

Santa  Clara  Mission,  Orchard,  Red- 
man   742 

Santa  Cruz  Island,  Aguirre 805 

Santa  Clara,  Mission  Church  prop- 
erty  609 


Santa  Clara  Mission,  Galindo 313 

Santa  Clara  or  El  Norte 389 

Santa  Clara,  Rio  de 225 

Santa  Cruz  Island,  Aguire 805 

Santa  Cruz  Island,  Castillero 176 

Santa  Gertrudes,  Nieto 423 

"  Carpenter 339 

"  Colima 475 

Santa  Inez  Mission,  Covarrubias . . .  538 
Santa  Inez,  Mission  Church  prop'ty.  609 
Santa  Isabel,  San  Luis  Obisbo  co. .  .356 

"  San  Diego  CO 239 

Santa  Manuela 48 

Santa  Margarita,  Marin  co 72 

Santa  Margarita,  San  Luis  Obispo  co .  501 

Santa  Margarita  y  Las  Flores 700 

Santa  Monica 457 

Santa  Paula  y  Saticoy 550 

Santa  Rita,  Sanjon  de 673 

"  Alameda  co 60 

"  Monterey  co 531 

"  Santa  Barbara  co 473 

Santa  Rosa  Island 117 

Santa  Rosa,  San  Luis  Obispo  co  — 140 

"  Santa  Barbara  co 474 

"  San  Diego  co 486 

Santa  Rosa,  Llano  de,  Carrillo 252 

Miller... -....288 

Hendley 499 

Santa  Teresa 506 

Santa  Ysabel,  San  Luis  Obispo  co.  .356 

San  Diego  co 239 

Santiago  de  Santa  Ana 470 

Santiago,  Lomas  de 42 1 

Santos  Calle,  Laguna  de 70 

Saticoy 550 

Saucelito 104 

Saucito 614 

Saucos,  Los 107 

Sausal  Redondo 456 

Sausal,  Rancho  de 557 

Sayente 771 

Segunda,  Canada  de  la 554 

Semi 38 

Seno  de  Mallacomes  or  Moristal  y 

Plan  do  Agua  Caliente - .   58 

Sefio  de  Mallacomes  or  Moristal  y 

Plan  de  Agua  Caliente 59 

Sefio  de  Malcomes  or  Moristal 657 

Serritos,  Los 351 


124 


INDEX    TO    RANCHOS. 


h  spe 49 

Slioquel 184 

593 

P  Gnega 596 

S  enaga  de  Gabilan 782 

Siarra,  La,  Los  Angclos  co 453 

k-'crra,  La,  San  Bernardino  co 382 

b  crra  de  los  Verdugos 438 

Simi 38 

F  isquoc Ill 

t- '  tio  de  la  Brca 161 

^  ;brante.  El 96 

fcocayac 235 

!*■  3cayre 93 

Soledad,  Mission  de  la,  Soberanes.  .526 
^  iledad,  Mission  de  la,  Church  prop- 
erty  609 

^'  >iedad.  La 485 

Soils 690 

Sonoma,  City  of 237 

t-  onora  City 639 

Soquel  or  Shoqnel 184 

593 

S  otoyome 16 

r  otoyomi 792 

f'  oulajule,  Brackett 233 

"  Cornwell 234 

"  Vasquez 245 

"  Watkins 246 

"         Gormley 247 

"  Fuller 797 

S-anislao,  Rio  del 767 

buey,  (See  Errata) 41 

S uisun,  Eitchie 3 

■'  iiisun,  Fine 660 

Sur,  El 124 

Siir  Chiquita 546 

Suscol 291 

:=^ntter,  Town  of 759 

"aolie,  Laguna  de,  Castro 600 

Clark 601 

"  "  Limantour 781 

Tamalpais 493 

Tajauta 391> 

" 'ejon 240 

Temalpais 493 

"^iemascal,  San  Bernardino  co 414 

"  Santa  Barbara  co 521 

'"^MTiecula,  Valdez 342 


Temecula,  Estudillo 766 

"  Apis 435 

Tepusquet 206 

Tequepis 88 

Tequisquita,  Llano  del 133 

Tigera,  Paso  de  la 427 

"       "     458 

Tiburon,  Punta  del 549 

Tinaquaic 219 

Tinicasia 80 

Todos  Santos  y  San  Antonio 228 

Tolenas,  Las 26 

Tomales  y  Paulines 114 

Tomales,  Bolsa  de 205 

Topanga  Malibu 483 

Toro,  El...., 191 

Trabuco 412 

Tracts  of  land — see  note  at  the  end  of    > 
index, 

Trancas,  Las 209 

Tres  Ojos  de  Agua 591 

Tucho,  El,  Gomez 679 

Tucho,  El,  Cole 716 

"       Castro 790 

Tujunga 464 

Tularcitos,  Sta  Clara  &  Alameda  cos.  148 

Tularcitos,  Los,  Monterey  co 195 

Tulucay 126 

Tzabaco 298 


.Ulistac 

\jl 


108 

pmos.  Los 319 

Ulpinos 813 

Uvas,  Las 7 


Valle  de  San  Jose,  Warner 254 

"  "  Alameda  CO 231 

Portilla 469 

Valle  de  Pamo 332 

Valle  de  las  Viejas 484 

Valle  de  San  Felipe 461 

Vallecitos,  Los 451 

Vaqueros,  Canada  de  los 79 

Vega  del  Eio  del  Pajaro 279 

Verdugos,  Sierra  de  los 438 

Vena,  La 513 

Vergeles,  Rancho  de  las 169 

Viejas,  Valle  do  las 484 

Virgenes,  Los,  Dominguez 344 

Virgenes,  Los,  Carrillo 508 


INDEX  TO  RANCHOS. 


125 


Visitacion 142    Yuciiy  . 

Voca  do  Santa  Monica 445    Yiilupa 


768 
,249 


Willy 


Yegua  Island 307 

Yerba  Buena  or  Socayre 93 

Yerba  Buena  Island,  Polack 11 

"          "           "        Limantour.  ...549 
Yokaya 335 


226    Zaca,  La 265 

Zanjon,  Riconada  del 532 

Zanjones 151 

Zanjon  de  Santa  Rita 673 

Zanjon  de  Moquelumnes 393 

Zayanta 260 

Zayantc 309 


JSTOTE. 

Ranchos,  Tracts  of  Land  and  Lots  described  without  Names. 

Ranchos  and  Tracts  of  Land,  Nos.  ^  41,  42,  51,  63,  91,  103,  109,  113,  130,  158 
224,  232,  281,  297,  320,  376,  377,  511,  514,  548,  560,  572,  573,  605,  619,  632, 
641,  651,  652,  654,  656,  661,  662,  664,  676,  685,  687,  692,  693,  695,  698,  701, 
715,  718,  738,  747,  749,  756,  758,  770,  772,  776,  777,  779,  807,  809. 

Lots  in  Mission  Dolores,  Nos.  5,  3^,  34,  46,  100,  171,  172,  229,  60^,  612,  671,  704, 
705. 

Lots  in  San  Francisco,  Nos.  29,  74,  94,  604,  682,  712,  795,  811. 

Lots  near  San  Gabriel,  Nos.  417,  418,  419,  420,  424,  425,  447,  448,  449,  450,  466, 
467,  468,  489. 

Lots  in  Los  Angeles  county,  Nos.  376,  377,  420,  477,  688,  698. 

Lots  in  Monterey  county,  Nos.  560,  607,  631,  681. 

Lots  in  San  Luis  Obispo  county,  Nos.  39,  177. 

Lots  in  Santa  Clara  county,  Nos.  669,  699. 

Lot  in  San  Diego  county,  No.  796. 

Lot  in  Sacramento  City,  No.  637. 

Lot  in  Santa  Barbara  county.  No.  51. 

.Lot  in  Marin  county.  No.  105, 

Lot  in  Sonoma  City,  No.  134. 

Lot  in  Sonoma  county.  No.  806. 


INDEX  TO  CLAIMANTS, 


Abila,  Juan,  et  al .399 

"      Miguel.... 215 

216 

314 

"       Januario 372 

"       Enrique 391 

"       Bruno 381 

"       Antonio  Ygnacio 456 

Abrego,  Jose,  et  al 595 

Aguilar,  Casildo,  et  al 458 

"         Lugarclo 417 

"        Jose  Maria 360 

Aguirre,  Antonio  &  I.  del  Valle 240 

"         Jose  Antonio 805 

Aguirre,  Jose  Antonio,  in  right  of  his 

wife 116 

Alemany,  J.  S.,  et  al 663 

"     609 

Alexander,  David  W.,  et  al 464 

D.  W 688 

"  Cyrus 792 

"  David  AV.,  et  al 465 

"    338 

Alvarado,  Juan  B.,  heirs  of 462 

"        Ysidro  Maria 625 

"        Erancisco  Maria 452 

"         Juan  B 684 

"        Joaquina 118 

Alvirez,  Juan 713 

Alviso,  Augustin 258 

Alviso,  Jos6  Maria 141 

Alviso,  Erancisco  y  Ramon  Rodri- 
guez   209 

Alvisu,  Rafael 278 

"      Manuel 276 

Alvisu,  Jos6  Antonio 359 


Amador,  Jose  Maria 128 

Amesti,  Jose 174 

Andres  et  al 481 

Anguisola,  Manuel 521 

Anzar,  Juan  Miguel  &  M.  Larios ...  22 

20 

279 

•'      Maria  Antonio  Castro  de 628 

"  "  "  "         680 

Alvitre,  Juan 408 

Apis,  Pablo 435 

Arce,  Erancisco 356 

669 

Arellanes,  Teodoro 66 

Arellanes,  Luis,  et  al 121 

Teodoro 163 

Arguello,  Gervesio,  et  al 367 

"         Santiago 436 

Arguello,  Maria  de  la  Soledad  Orte- 
ga de,  et  als  2 

Arguello,  Santiago 175 

Armijo,  Dolores  Riesgo,  et  al 26 

Arnas,  Jos6  de 687 

Aspinwall,  W.  H 307 

Ayala,  Crisogono 494 

Bailey,  Peter  D 580 

Bajorquez,  Bartolome 44 

Baldez,  Maria  Rita 478 

Bale,  Maria  Ygnacio  del 166 

Balenzuela,  Antonio,  et  al 408 

Bandini,  Juan •. . .  .361 

Bandini,  Juan 380 

Barbara,  Santa,  City  Of 543 

Borgas,  Jose  Manuel 635 


INDEX   TO   CLAIMANTS. 


127 


Bartlett,  Lyman 734 

Bassett,  Nathaniel 658 

Bennett,  Narciso 699 

Mary  S 718 

Bennitz,  William 626 

Berdugo,  Julio,  et  al 403 

"        Maria  Ygnacio . . . .  • 416 

Bernal,  Carmen  Sibrian  &  Jose  Cor- 

nelio 30 

"      Barcelia 779 

"       778 

516 

"       C.  S.  de 682 

"       C-S-de,  etal 671 

"      Bruno 668 

"      Jos6  de  Jesus,  ct  al 617 

"       Agustin 506 

Berreyesa,  Francisco,  Heirs  of  G.  Ber- 

reyesa 277 

Berreyesa,  Maria  Anastasia  Higuera, 

etal 236 

"  Maria  L.  B.,  et  al 503 

Nicolas 757 

"  Jose  de  los  Santos 58 

"  Jos6  Jesus 768 

"  Jos6  Santos 806 

Besse,  Harriet 798 

Bidwell,  John 143 

"     319 

Billings  et  al-,  Assignee  of  Simmons.  188 
Bissel,  G.  W.  P.,  &  W.  H.  Aspinwall.307 

Black  &  Halleck 270 

Blackburn,  William 696 

Blair,  James 527 

Blanco,  Thomas,  heirs  of 631 

Bocle,  William 210 

Boggs,  Lilburn  W 500 

"       A.L 729 

BolcofF,  Francisco  and  Juan 214 

Bolton,  James  K 81 

Bonilia,  Jose  Mariano 177 

Boronda,  Maria  Concepcion 636 

"         Eusebio 532 

"        Jose  Manuel 533 

Boulio,  Oliver 762 

Brackett,  John  S 233 

Branch,  Francisco 48 


162 

Breed,  E  A.,  et  al 295 


Brecn,  Patrick 560 

Brenhan,  Isaac,  Trustee   287 

Brcnham,  Charles  J.,  et  al 289 

Briones,  Gregorio 541 

"        Juana 119 

Brown,  Elam 14 

"       John  E 763 

EdmimdL 70 

L.  D.,  et  al 773 

"        Charles,  et  al 756 

Buckelew,  B.  B 740 

Buelna,  Encarnacion 542 

Bull,  L.  C.  et  al.,  heirs  of  William 

Fisher 244 

Burnett,  Peter  H 637 

Burton,  Luis  T 528 

"       Lewis  T 312 

Butron,  Eamona 565 

Cambuston,  Henry 511 

Camilio,  Ynitia 71 

Cane,  Vicente 123 

Canil,  Adolpli 753 

Cantua,  Vicente 290 

Guadalupe 137 

Carney,  John,  and  Ellen  White 99 

Carpenter,  Samuel 339 

Carpentier,  H.  W 662 

"  E.  R 661 

Carrillo,  Anastasio 327 

"  "        328 

Carson,  Maria  Louisa 651 

Carrillo,  Eamona  de  Wilson 41 

"         Carlos  Antonio 49 

Carrillo  de  Jones,  Manuela 117 

Carrillo,  Joaquin  and  Josd  Antonio.  178 

"        Joaquin,  et  al 534 

252 

"  "        and  Jose  Antonio .    15 

"         Eaimundo 492 

"         Jose  Antonio  de  la  Guerra  y  .324 

Pedro  C 498 

"      491 

"         Domingo,  heirs  of,  et  al. . . 508 
"         Maria  del  Espiritu  Santo . . .  539 

Felicidad 646 

"         Julio 643 

Carson,  Maria  Louisa 651 

Castanares,  Jose  Maria 785 

Castillero,  Andres 366 


128 


INDEX   TO    CLAIMANTS. 


Castillero,  Andres 176 

Castro,  Mariano 257 

''         Salvador 358 

"         Juan  Jose  and  Victor 96 

Martina 184 

"       593 

"        Joaquin  Ysidro 390 

Guadalupe 566 

Angel • 596 

"         Jos6 546 

"        Jos6,  et  al 693 

"         Manuel... 600 

"        Maria  Antonia  Pico  de,  et  al.606 

Rafael 620 

Rufina,  etal 690 

Rutina 607 

Guillermo 692 

285 

Modesta 703 

*'         Simeon,  Widow  and  heirs  of.  790 

Cathcart,  Robert,  Administrator 771 

Catholic  Church 609 

Cazares,  Antonio 19 

Celis,  Eulogio  de 796 

378 

Cervantcz,  Cruz 56 

Chabolla,  A.  Widow  and  heirs  of.  .  .777 

Chabolla,  Anastasio 393 

Chaboya,  Pedro 701 

"        Antonio 93 

Chana,  Claude 196 

Chapman,  Guadalupe  Ortega  de,  et  al.512 

Chard,  Guillermo 150 

Chiles,  Jos6  B 197 

City  of  San  Diego 589 

"      San  Jose 286 

"      San  Jose 287 

"      San  Prancisco 280 

"      Santa  Barbara 543 

"     Los  Angeles 422 

"     Monterey • 714 

"      San  Luis  Obispo 738 

"      Sacramento 793 

"      Sacramento 633 

"      Sonoma 237 

"      Sonora 639 

Clark,  Jeremiah,  et  al 601 

Coal,  Thomas 716 

Cocks,  Henry 571 


Cocks,  Henry 572 

Colima,  Tomas  Sanchez 475 

Canil,  Adolph,  et  al 753 

Cook,  Martin  E.,  et  al 657 

Conn,  John 804 

Coombs,  N 202 

Coombs,  N 724 

"  810 

Coombs  and  Gordon 202 

Cooper,  John  B.  R 193 

124 

138 

Cornwell,  George  N- 726 

,234 

Coronel,  Antonio 438 

Cota,  Valentine,  et  al 225 

"     Maria  Jesus  Olivera  de,  et  al.474 
"     Antonio  Maria  et  al,  heirs  of 

T.   Olivera 206 

Couts,   Cave  J 485 

Coun,  John 804 

Courtney,  Andrew  J.  and  Wife 425 

Covarrubias,  Jose  Maria,  et  al 538 

538 

"  "  547 

536 

Covillaud,  C,  Adm'r  of  J.  Thomp- 
son  147 

Charles,  ct  al 248 

Cruz,  Maria  Antonio 598 

Curtis,  Henry  C 709 

ManuelaT 23 

\ 

Dalton,  Henry 364 

"  "     .343 

"  "     • 331 

Dana,  William  A.,  et  al 706 

G ; 9 

"  "         A.,  etal 707 

Davis,  William  H.,et  al 811 

Davison,  John  P.,  et  al 550 

Del  Valle,  J 240 

Del  Bale,  M.  Y.,  et  al 1'66 

De  la  Guerra  y  Noriega,  Jose 38 

"     '       "  "      13 

"     135 

"  "  "      296 

"  y  Lataillade,  Jose  Anto. 324 
"  y  Carrillo,  Maria  Anto. 265 
"  "  "  .322 


INDEX    TO    CLAIMANTS. 


^'2\) 


Dc  laCjuerrayLataillade,  Maria  Aut.3()9 

.189 


Dcla  Torre,  J 186  j 

De  Zaldo,  Elizabctli 603  | 

Den,  Nicholas  A 517  ' 

299  ! 

"     Richard  S 698  | 

621  i 

Diaz,  Manuel 311  [ 

Diego,  San,  City  of 589 

Dodero,  Nicolas 591 

Domingo,  Jose 467 

Dominguez,  Victoria,  et  al 330 

Manuel,  et  al 398 

•'  Francisco,  et  al 556 

Nasario 480 

Dorland,  Thomas 29 

Duarte,  Andres 374 

Duarte,  Andres 450 

Dye,  Francisco 122 

Eaton,  Robert  S 142 

Eldridge,  James 645 

Enright,  James,  et  al 691 

"       514 

Escarilla,  Bias  A 608 

Espinoza,  Gabriel,  heirs  of,  et  al 570 

"         Carlos  C 624 

"         Salvador 355 

Estrada,  Joaquin 501 

"         Julian 140 

"         Rafael 535 

"         Pedro 588 

Estudillo,  Magdalena 437 

Victoria  D 766 

"         Jose  Joaquin 256 

"        Jose  Antonio 115 

Estudillo  de  Aguirre  Maria  del  Ro- 
sario 116 

Farley,  A 725 

Farrell,  Jasper  O 86 

136 

....180 

Farwell,  heirs  of 651 

Fells,  Domingo 53 

"      Fernando 300 

"       Jacoba 318 

J 


Fernnndcz,  Dionisio  Z.,  et  al 109 

Fernando 73 

Fine,  J.  H 660 

Fisher,  William,  heirs  of 244 

Fitch,  Josefa  Carrillo,  et  al 16 

Fitch,  Josefa  Carrillo  de,  et  al.,  heirs 

of  H.  D.  Fitcli 268 

Flores,  Jos6  Maria 429 

Folsom,  Joseph  L.  and  Anna  Maria 

Spark 321 

Forbes,  William 326 

Fossat,  Charles 340 

Foster,  Juan 394 

" 396 

"      410 

"      412 

"      460 

"      461 

"     et  al 808 

"         Maria  Merced  Lugo  de 272 

Foxen,  Guillermo  Domingo.- 219 

Francisco,  City  of 280 

Frank,  Otto  H 649 

Fremont,  John  C 1 

Friuk,  Daniel 259 

Frisbie,  John  B 676 

Fuentes,  Jose  Maria 496 

Fuller,  William  A 797 

Galbraith,  J.  D 205 

Galindo,  Juan  C 313 

Gallardo,  Juan 477 

Garcia,  Rafael 113 

Garcia,  Rafael 114 

Garcia,  Maria  de  Jesus 383 

Garfias,  Manuel 345 

Gelston,  Roland 6 

712 

German,  Antonio  and  Faustin 62 

Gomez  Miguel 504 

"      R.  Heirs  of. 195 

"      Vicente 569 

"      etal 679 

Gonzales,  Teodoro 502 

"        Juan  Jos^ 336 

"         Jose  Rafael 27 

"        Mariana 27 

Gore,  John  C 564 

Gordon,  Wm 203 

"         "    and  Nathaniel  Coombs. 202 


130 


INDEX   TO    CLAIMANTS. 


Gormley,  Martin  F 247 

Graham,  Isaac 260 

Green,  Joseph 585 

"       Talbot  H 749 

Greer,  Maria  Luisa 21 

Gregory,  D.  S 634 

Grimes,  Hiram 683 

"     etal 293 

"     181 

Guadalupe  Mining  Co 744 

Guerra — See  De  la  Guerra. 

Guerrero,  Francisco,  Heirs  of 229 

"         Josefa  Haro,  et  al,,  heirs  of 

Francisco  Guerrero  ....  164 

Gutierrez,  Joaquin 271 

"         Octaviano 217 

Haight,  Henry 211 

Haight,  Fletcher  M 554 

Halleck,  H.  W.  and  James  Black.  .  .270 

Hamley,  Geo.  W 325 

Harbin,  James  M 721 

261 

Harnes,  J.  et  al 592 

Haro,  Josefa  de,  et  al 102 

"       101 

"     Francisco  de.  Heirs  of. 704 

705 

Hart  and  McGarry 723 

Hart,  Chas.  E 799 

Hartnell,  Guillermo  Eduardo 228 

"       Wm.E.  P 264 

Hays,  Benjamin 317 

Hendley,  John 659 

*'  "     et  al 499 

Hensley,  Samuel  J 201 

Herrera,  Tomas,  and  G.  Quintana,  .304 

Hicks  and  Martin 523 

Higuera,  Joaquin 677 

"      Marta  Frias  de 587 

"      Antonia,  et  al 149 

"      et  al.,  Heirs  of  J.  A 148 

"       Fulgencio 78 

"      Francisco,  et  al 409 

Hill,  Reuben  M 801 

Hill,  Daniel 520 

Hooker,  Joseph 739 

Hoover,  Leonce,  Adm'r 664 

Hoppe,  Jacob  D 108 

Hopkins,  Robert 761 


Hornsby,  J.  L 282 

Horrel,  Johnson,  et  al 584 

579 

Howard,  Wm.  D.  M 559 

Huie,  James  B Ill 

Huber,  Enrique 159 

Ide,  Wm.  B 185 

Indians  of  the  Mission  of  San  Rafael  80 

Ingrham,  Horace 720 

Iturbide,  Agustin,  Heirs  of 281 

Johnson,  Wm 91 

W.  S.,etal 567 

Jones,  Manuela  Carrillo  de 117 

Jones,  John  F.,  et  al 575 

Jones,  Wm.  Carey 348 

"     etal 613 

"   686 

"   750 

Jouan,  Agustin 789 

Juana,  Maria  de  los  Angeles 471 

Julian  and  Fernando,  (Indians) 73 

Juares,  Cayetano 126 

335 

Keely,  Wm 583 

Keyes,  John 222 

Kilburn,  R.  S 728 

"     809 

Knight,  Thomas  P , . .   59 

Knight,  Eben 735 

Langley,  H.  G 791 

Larios,  Justo,  et  al 788 

Manuel 297 

"       22 

Larkin,  Francis,  et  al 130 

Larkin,  Thomas  0 129 

131 

754 

Lassen,  Peter 182 

Leavenworth,  T.  M 760 

Ledesma,  Jose 447 

Leese,  Jacob  P 611 

557 

353 

165 

Leese  and  Vallejo 74 

Lestrade,  Anacleto 371 


INDEX   TO    CLAIMANTS. 


131 


Lestradc,  Anacleto 488 

Limantour,  Jose  Y 784 

783 

782 

781 

780 

715 

"      "    549 

548 

Linares,  Victor 39 

Lippincott,  Benjamin  S 652 

Little,  Milton 807 

Littlcjohn,  David,  Heirs  of 665 

Livermore,  liobert 77 

Livermore,  Robert   79 

Lorenzana,  Apolinaria 442 

Los  Angeles,  City  of 422 

Los  Angeles,  M^  Ja  de  los 471 

Love,  John 582 

Luco,  Juan  Maria,  et  al 813 

Lugo  de  Foster,  Maria  M 272 

Lugo,  Antonio  Maria 308 

Lugo,  Jos6  del  Carmen,  et  al 316 

Lugo,  Juana  Briones,  et  al 537 

Machado,  Agustin,  et  al 369 

"        Jesus. 618 

"         Maria  Antonia  , . .  , 344 

Madie,  Sarah  N 802 

Majors,  J.  L 208 

"   for  his  wife  Maria  Castro.207 

Malarin,  Mariano 1 54 

153 

152 

151 

Mallagh,  Juan  de  Jesus 647 

Malo,  Jose  Ramon 473 

Malo,  Jose  Ramon 476 

Manuel 392 

Marron,  Juan  Maria 411 

Marsh,  John 213 

Martin,  Julius .  .323 

Martin  and  Hicks 523 

Martin,  Juan 223 

Martinez,  Maximo 36 

Maube,  Arno 489 

Mayer,  Charles 199 

Mayer,  Jacob  R.,  et  al 644 

McCobb,  H.  D 170 

McCoorabs,  J.  R 730 


McCoombs,  Hannah 722 

"  Benjamin 577 

McDonald,  Ann,  et  al 694 

McDougal,  F.  A.,  et  al 680 

McGarry 723 

McKee,  Wm.  H 156 

McKinley,  James 530 

529 

McNeil,  James 736 

Meadows,  James 573 

Mechado,  Antonia  Maria 344 

Melius,  Francis 338 

Mesa,  Encarnacion,  et  al 269 

Mesa,  Maria  Antonia 238 

Meyer,  Charles,  et  al 199 

Miller,  Joseph  M 288 

Mining  Co 744 

Miramontes,  Candelario 354 

Miramontes,  Vicente,  et  al..  Heirs  of 

Candelario  Miramontes 354 

Miranda,  Juana  Briones  de,  et  al.. .  .310 

Modio,  Sarah  Ann. 802 

Monmany,  Jose  and  Jaime  de  Puig.702 

Montalva,  Josefa 414 

Monterey,  City  of 714 

Moraga,  Joaquin 590 

Morales,  Josefa,  and  Castillo  Negrete.275 

Morchon,  Nicolas 675 

Morehead,  James  G 89 

Moreno,  Juan 486 

Morillo,  Jorge,  et  al 432 

Morillo,  Jos6  Justo,  et  al 459 

Morse,  Charles,  et  al 769 

Mount,  Joseph,  et  al 581 

Munras,  Catalina  Manzaneli  de 155 

Munras,  Coucepcion 145 

Murphy,  T.  for  San  Rafael  Indians.   80 

Timoteo 72 

105 

"        Bernard 52 

Bernard 55 

7 

95 

"        Daniel  and  Bernard 25 

"        James  and  Martin  ........   25 

"         James 303 

Martin,  Jr 770 

"       Sr.... 748 

"      90 

Naglee  and  Pico 267 


132 


INDEX    TO    CLAIMANTS. 


Nai'vacz,  Jose  Agustin 75 

Neal,  Samuel 183 

Ne<rrete,  Francisco  C 55 

Negrete,  Josefa  Morales  del  Castillo. 275 

Neligh,  Robert  B 320 

Nieto,  Conccpcion,  et  al 423 

Nieto  Tract. 351,  400,  402,  404,  423,  459 

Noe,  James 294 

Noe,  Jose  de  Jesus 17 

Noriega — Sec  De  la  Guerra. 

Norieg-a,  Jose    619 

Noriega  and  Livermore 77 

Norris,  Samuel 146 

Norris,  Leo 349 

Nunez,  Sebastian 35 

Nje,  Michael 226 

Obispo,  San  Luis,  City  of 738 

Odon,  Urbano,  et  al 392 

O'Fan-el,  Jasper 86 

"     180 

"      136 

Ogden  and  Nye 731 

Olivas,  Raimondo,  et  al 472 

Olivera,  Antonio    553 

"        Tomas,  Heirs  of 206 

"        Diego  and  T.  Arellanes. ...   66 

Olvera,  Agustin 428 

375 

576 

Ontiveros,  Juan  P 440 

Ord,  James  L 632 

Ortega,  Maria  Antonio 623 

Miguel 121 

"       Antonio  Maria,  et  al 522 

"       Jose  Joaquin 332 

and  E.  Stokes. 239 

"    Dolores 519 

Quintin 630 

"      etal 112 

E.  M.  and  Luis  Arellanes..  .  121 

Osa,  Vicente  de  la 379 

Osborn,  Wm.  H 733 

Oslo,  Antonio  Maria 18 

Oslo,  Antonio  Maria 641 

Osuna,  Juliana  Lopez 441 

Pacheco,  Tomas,  &  Agustin  Alviso.258 

"        Ygnacio 198 

'*        Rafaela  Soto  de 179 


Pacheco,  Juan  Sanchez  de,  heirs  of, .  1 68 

"        Salvio 76 

"        Francisco  Perez 63 

"      ...". 64 

"      65 

"      47 

"        Jose  Dolores 60 

"        Juan  Perez 37 

Page,  Thomas  S 350 

Palmer,  Joseph  C,  et  al 515 

Palomares,  etal,  Heirs  of  F.  Guerero.229 

Palomares,  Ygnacio. 365 

Panaud,  Clement,  et  al 751 

"     752 

Pastor,  Ignacio 305 

Patchell,  John 586 

Payson,  Henry  R ,  745 

Pedroiena  Miguel,  Heirs  of 262 

Pedrorena,  Miguel,  Heirs  of 263 

Pena,  J.  G.,  Heirs  of 298 

Pena,  Juan  Felipe 57 

Peralta,  Sebastian,  et  al .386 

"       Domingo 306 

301 

"       Ygnacio 274 

"       Antonio 273 

"       Domingo  and  Vicente 4 

Maria  Teodora 648 

Perez,  Domingo 531 

Perez,  Fcrmina  Espinozade,  et  al. .  .531 

Phelps,  Bethuel 525 

114 

Pico,  Andres 612 

357 

"        444 

"       et  al 400 

''     110 

•'     401 

Pico,  Pio 407 

"   etal  373 

"       "      "    700 

"     Maria  Antonio,  et  al 689 

"     315 

"     Francisco 602 

"     A.  M.  and  H.  M.  Naglee 267 

"    Jost3  de  Jesus 302 

Pogue,  L.  E.,  et  al 563 

Polack,  Joel  S.,  et  al II 

Poll,  Manuel  Anto  Rodriguez  de 479 

Pope,  Joseph,  et  al 719 


INDEX   TO    CLAIMANTS. 


138 


Portilla,  Silvestre  de  la 469  ! 

Potter,  John,  Heirs  of 651 

Pratt,  Emanuel 235 

Prudhomme,  Leon  Victor 483 

"       370 

Prudou,  Victor 786 

711 

Quintaua,  G 304 

Quintana,  Francisco  Estevan 513 

Randall,  Andrew 772 

666 

and  S.Todd 227 

"  "        and  F.  M.  Haig:lit.554 

555 

Ransom,  Leander 610 

Reading,  Pearson  B 212 

28 

Redman,  J.  W.,  et  al 742 

Reed,  Samuel  G.,  et  al 509 

Reid,  Juan,  Heirs  of 497 

Reid,  Victoria 468 

"  "        455 

Revere,  Jose  W 667 

Reynolds,  Wm.,  and  Daniel  Frink.  .259 

Reyes,  Isidor,  et  al 445 

Richardson,  Guillermo  Antonio  . . .  .103 

"       ....104 

Richardson,  Maria  Anta  Martinez  de.284 

Rico,  Francisco,  et  al 767 

Ridley,  Presentacion  de,  et  al 670 

Rios,  Petronillo 622 

241 

Rios,  Santiago 420 

Ritchie,  Archibald  A 3 

12 

737 

Ritchie,  A.  A.  and  Paul  S.  Forbes. .   40 

Robbins,  Tomas  M 221 

Robles,  Teodoro  and  Secundino ....  200 

Rocha,  Antonio  Jose,  et  al 487 

Rockwell  and  Knight 59 

Rodriguez,  Ramon,  and  F.  Alviso . .  209 
"  J.  T.  de,  et  al..  Heirs  of 

R.  Rodriguez 242 

"  Antonio 568 

Manuel 627 

"  Valencia  Concep",  et  al.642 

"  Maria  Coucepcion  V.  de.542 


Rodriguez,  Sebastian 187 

192 

Roland,  John,  and  J.  L.  Hornsby. .  .282 

"  "      et  al 385 

Juan 232 

Romero,  Inoccncio,  et  al 654 

Rose,  Julius  K 732 

Rose,  John,  et  al 605 

Roubideau,  Luis 463 

"     443 

Rowc,  Rufus,  et  al 640 

Rufino,  Francisco 100 

Ruiz,  Gabriel,  et  al 430 

Ruiz,  Joaquin 405 

Russel,  Thomas 747 

Sacramento,  City  of 633 

"      793 

Sais,  Domingo 84 

Sainsevain,  Pedro 283 

Sales,  Francisco 448 

Sanchez,  Jose  Maria,  et  al 161 

"  "    dela  Cruz,  et  al 97 

672 

"       Francisco 352 

"       Juan 389 

"       Juan  Matias 347 

"       Juan  Matias 397 

"       Tomas,  et  al 427 

"       Hilario 493 

"       Vicente,  Heirs  of  Jose  M. 

Sanchez 132 

"      Jose  Maria 133 

"       Rafael 674 

San  Diego,  City  of 589 

San  Francisco,  City  of 280 

San  Jose,  City  of 286 

"       287 

San  Luis  Obispo,  City  of 738 

Santa  Barbara,  City  of 543 

Santos 73 

Scherreback,  Peter 795 

Schultless,  Jose  F.,  et  al 171 

"     172 

Scott,  Jonathan  R.  &  Benj,  Hays. .  .317 

Semple,  CD 144 

Sepulveda,  Francisco 457 

"  Vicenta 453 

Jose 406 

"         Jose  Loreto,  et  al 446 


134 


INDEX   TO    CLAIMANTS. 


Serrano,  Jose .431 

"  "   et  al 439 

Sexton,  Daniel 376 

"      377 

Shaddon,  Thomas 695 

Sheldon,  Catherine 173 

Shorb,  James  D 812 

Silvas,  Juan 419 

Simeon 449 

Simmons,  Bezer,  assignee  of 188 

Simmons,  Bezer,  assignee  of 68 

Smith,  H.  C 685 

Smith,    Stephen 604 

"  "       and  M.  T.  Curtis.. .   23 

24 

Smith,  Thomas  Jeficrson 5 

46 

"      Mowry  W 746 

Siiooks,  Maria  Antonia 454 

Soberancs,  Feliciano 505 

■ 526 

Soberanes,  Erancisco 673 

Soberanes,  Mariano 544 

Soberanes,  Mariano  et  al. . . .    551 

Soberanes,  Maria  Josefa 599 

Sonoma,  City  of 237 

Sonora,  City  of 639 

Soto,  Teodora 204 

Soto  Lorenzo 451 

Soto,  Barbara,  et  al 524 

Soto,  Joaquin 650 

Soto,  Joaquin,  Heirs  of 552 

Soto,  Josefa 157 

Sparks,  Anna  Maria   321 

Sparks,  Isaac  J 362 

"  "      363 

Spcnce,  David 518 

Spence,  David  S 54 

Stearns,  Abel 404 

"     346 

"     94 

Stevenson,  J.  D.,  et  al 616 

Stockton,  Robert  F 8 

Stokes,  James 169 

"       Edward 239 

"      755 

"      758 

Stone,  C.  P 775 

Strode,  C.  B 764 

"    765 


Sunol,  Antonio,  et  al 231 

"    '.167 

Sutherland,  J.  H.,  for  Pedro rena  h'rs  .262    ^ 

.263 

Sutter,  John  A 759 

743 

"        92 

656 

Swat,  George 655 

Swanson,  Jos.,  Adm'r  of  Wm.  Welcli, 
deceased 127 

Tapia,  Gregorio 597 

Tasion,  Manuel  Sales 466 

Temple,  Juan 351 

Temple,  E.  P.  E.  &  Matias  Sanchez. 347 
Temple,  Juan  &  D.  W.  Alexander.  .688 

Teschemacher,  H.  E.,  et  al 507 

Thomes,  Eobt.  H 107 

Thompson,  John,  Estate  of 147 

Thompson,  Joseph  P 495 

334 

Thompson,  Alpheus  Basilio 158 

Tico,  Eernando 139 

51 

Tico,  Juan  de  Rodriguez,  Heirs  of  R. 

Rodriquez 242 

Todd,  Samuel 227 

Toomes,  Alberto  G 106 

Torre,  Joaquin  de  la 186 

Torres,  Manuel 43 

Truebody,  John 727 

Urbano,  Odon,  Manuel,  et  al 392 

Ursua,  Julian,  et  al 545 

Vaca  &  Pefia 57 

Valencia,  Candelario 34 

Valencia,  Eustaquio  &  Jose  Ramon .   33 

Valencia,  Maria  Manuel 490 

Valencia,  Paula  Sanchez  de 774 

Valentine,  Thos.  B 45 

Valenzuela,  Rafael,  et  al 418 

Valenzuela,  Antonio,  et  al 408 

Valle  del,  Ignacio  &  Anto.  Aguirre.240 

Vallejo,  M.  G 134 

"  "    24& 

"  " 250 

''  "    337 

"    741 


INDEX    TO    CLAIMANTS. 


135 


Vallejo,  M.  G 291 

Vallcjo,  Jos<§  de  Jesus 82 

"        "       83 

"  ''         "       85 

Vallcjo,  Salvador 74 

"  "         717 

194 

794 

Vallejo,  Uladislao 510 

Vasquez,  Tiburcio 594 

Vasquez,  Ermenegildo 681 

Vasquez,  Felipe,  Heirs  of 540 

Vasquez,  Pedro 245 

Vassault,  Ferdinand 629 

Vefar,  Ricardo 388 

Vejar,  Emigdio 482 

Vignes,  Luis 341 

"    342 

Villa,  Antonio  Maria 88 

Villagran,  Miguel 678 

Villavicencia,  Jose  Maria 190 

Villavicencio,  Rafael 61 

Voss,  Emilius 10 

Walker,  Joel  P 578 

Walkinshaw,  Robert 125 

Walters,   Charles 191 

Walters,  Josefa  Antonio  Gomez  de..  195 

Warner,  J.  J 253 

"   254 

Warner,  Wm.  W 787 

Watkins,  Luis  D 246 

Watmough,  James  H 800 

Watson,  James 562 

Watson,  John  H.,  et  al 634 

Weeks,  James  W 708 

Weber,  Charles  M 255 

"  "  333 

Welch,  Wm 126 

West,  Guadalupe  Vasquez  de 251 

White,  Francis  J 776 

White,  Wm.  W 710 

White,  Charles,  Trustee 257 

White,  Charles 558 

638 

White,   Charles  &   Isaac  Brenham, 


Trustees 287 

White,  Michael 415 

White,  Michael 424 

White,  Michael 561 

White,  Ellen  E.,  &  John  Carney. . .   99 

White,  Ellen  E 98 

White,  Ellen  E 292 

White,  Ellen  E.,  et  al 638 

Whiting,  Frederick  E 653 

Williams,  James,  et  al 651 

Williams,  Isaac 433,  434 

Williams,  William 484 

Williams,  James  &  Squire 42 

Wilson,  John 614 

Wilson,  Juan 220 

"    218 

"     32 

Wilson,  John 50 

Wilson,  John 224 

Wilson, Benj.  D 368 

Wilson,  Edward 803 

Wolfskin,  Guillermo 230 

Wise  and  Ogden 731 

Workman,  Julian 574 

"      385 

''      697 

Workman,  William -413 

Wright,  David 69 

Yansens,  Agustin 266 

Ybarra,  Gil 329 

Ybarra,  Andres 395 

Ynitia,  Camilio 71 

Yorba,  Bernardo 382 

384 

387 

Yorba,  Bernardo,  et  al..  Heirs  of  An- 
tonio Yorba 470 

Yorba,  Antonio,  et  al.,  Heirs  of. 470 

Yorba,  Domingo 426 

Yorba,  Teodocio 421 

Yorba,  Ramon,  et  al 402 

Yorba,  Isabel 31 

Yount,  George  C 243 

160 

Yturbide,  Agustin,  Heirs  of 281 


tnde:^:. 


ABANDONMENT. 
See  Forfeiture. 
Presumption  of  abandonment  must  be  strong  and  unequivocal.     Nunez  v.  United 
States,  191. 

APPEAL. 

An  appeal  will  be  granted  on  application  made  after  the  expiration  of  the  term  at 
which  the  decree  was  rendered.  The  objection  that  the  Court  has  no  power 
in  the  premises  being  one  that  should  be  determined  by  the  Supreme  Court. 
Noe  V.  United  States,  242. 

The  claimants  omitted  to  file  with  the  Clerk  a  notice  of  their  intention  to  prose- 
cute the  appeal  from  the  decision  of  the  Board  of  Land  Commissioners  within 
the  six  months  prescribed  by  the  Act  of  1852  :  Held,  that  the  Court  was  with- 
out jurisdiction  over  the  case.     Yturhide  v.  United  States,  273. 

BONA  FIDES  OF  GRANTS. 

Case  confirmed — United  States  v.  Rico,  161. 

Cases  rejected  —  Redman  v.  United  States,  305;  LarJcin  v.  United  States,  313; 
Palmer  v.  United  States,  249. 

BOUNDARIES. 

See  Severance. 
The  objection  that  the  boundary  of  one  adjoining  rancho  is  affected  by  another 

claim  is  not  tenable,  the  controversy  being  between  and  concluding  the  United 

States  and  the  claimants  only.     United  States  v.  Heii's  of  Sanchez,  133. 
In  fixing  limits  of  lands  to  be  granted,  both  the  law  and  the  usage  of  the  Califor- 

nians  required  them  to  adopt  as  nearly  as  possible  a  rectangular  or  square 

figure.     United  States  v.  Soto  et  al.,  182. 
As  to  boundaries,  see  cases  :    United  States  v.  Berreyesa,  99 ;    United  States  v. 

Cooper,  101  ;   United  States  v.  Moraga,  103 ;   Grimes  v.  United  States,  107 ; 

United  States  v.  Siinol,  110;  Pacheco  v.  United  States,  113  ;   United  States  v. 

Fossat,  211,  376. 
K 


138  INDEX. 

CITIZENSHIP. 

Where  the  grant  itself  recites  that  the  claimant  was  a  naturalized  Mexican  citizen, 
and  it  is  shown  that  letters  of  naturalization  were  in  fact  issued  to  him  and  no 
fraud  is  pretended  to  have  been  committed  in  obtaining  them,  it  cannot  now  be 
contended  that  he  was  not  at  the  time  of  receiving  his  grant  a  naturalized 
Mexican  citizen.     United  States  v.  Reading,  18. 

CONDITIONS. 
See  Grant. 

CONFIRMATION. 

See  Grant. 
Cases  confirmed  where  the  conditions  of  grant  have  been  complied  with.  United 
States  V.  Larkin,  41  ;  Yoant  v.  United  States,  43  ;  United  States  v.  Yount,  49 ; 
Feliz  V.  United  States,  69;  United  States  v.  Greer,  72;  Castro  v.  United 
States,  72 ;  United  States  v.  Sunol,  74 ;  United  States  v.  Reid,  74 ;  United 
States  V.  Larkin,  75 ;  United  States  v.  Amador,  76  ;  United  States  v.  Horrell, 
78;  United  States  y.  Pacheco,  79;  United  States  v.  Thompson,  79;  United 
States  V.  Page,  80 ;  United  States  v,  Rodriguez,  82  ;  United  States  v.  Thomes, 
82 ;  Id.  83 ;  Brackett  v.  United  States,  85 ;  U^nited  States  v.  Cambuston,  86  ; 
Dana  v.  United  States,  87 ;  United  States  v.  Peralta,  89  ;  United  States  v. 
Cazares,  90  ;  United  States  v.  //e/rs  of  Guerrero,  94  ;  United  States  v.  CarriUo, 
96  ;  United  States  v.  i/e/rs  q/"  Palomares,  97 ;  JDe  Zaldo  v.  United  States,  98  ; 
United  States  v.  Bernal,  99;  United  States  v.  Os/o,  100;  United  States  v. 
Cooper,  101;  United  States  v.  Moraga,  103;  Bennitz  v.  United  States,  104; 
United  States  y.  Castro,  105;  Grimes  v.  United  States,  107;  United  States  y. 
Boggs,  109;  United  States  v.  Briones,  111 ;  United  States  v.  Bassett,  112 ;  P/co 
V.  United  States,  116;  United  States  v.  Leese,  124;  United  States  y.  Weber, 
126;  Z/niYeo?  /Stotes  v.  i^ric?,  129;  ^eirs  o/'  Chabolla  v.  Z7n?Vc'C?  ^Sfates,  130; 
United  States_^Y.  Ortega^X^D',  United  States  v.  Grimes,  137  ;  United  States  v. 
Payson,  138;  United  States  v.  Pope,  141  ;  P/co  v.  United  States,  142;  United 
States  v.  Murphy,  154;  United  States  v.  Ghana,  155;  United  States  v.  Bernal, 
139;  United  States  v.  Rodriguez,  170;  United  States  v.  Sheldon,  171  ;  United 
States  Y.  Pico,  172;  Rodriguez  v.  United  States,  175  ;  United  States  v.  Alvisu, 
176  ;    t/zj/Yec?  /Stofes  v.  .Soto,  177  ;  Armijo  v.  r/;«'ffrf  iS'fate.s,  248. 

CONQUEST. 
See  Grant. 

CONTINUANCE. 

The  fact  tliat  the  Circuit  and  District  Courts  are  simultaneously  in  session  is  not 
sufficient  cause  for  the  continuance  of  a  land  case.  Palmer  v.  United 
States,  227. 

DECREE. 

Where  a  decree  through  mistake  or  accident  does  not  express  the  judgment  of  the 
Court,  it  may  be  corrected  on  motion  made  after  the  expiration  of  the  term  at 
which  it  was  enrolled.      United  States  v.  Bennett,  281. 


INDEX.  130 

DENOUNCEMENT. 

Although  the  grantee  did  not  strictly  comply  with  the  condition  to  build  a  house 
within  the  year  from  the  date  of  the  grant ;  yet  where  the  grant  was  confirmed 
by  the  Assembl}^,  and  there  was  no  denouncement  under  the  former  Govern- 
ment, the  claim  should  be  confirmed.  United  States  v.  Soto,  68 ;  Pacheco  v. 
Uiiited  States,  113  ;  Pico  r.  United  States,  116. 

DESCRIPTION. 
See  Boundaries. 

DISEJ^O. 
See  Quantity. 

DISTRICT  ATTORNEY. 

See  Trial. 

EVIDENCE. 

Evidence  from  the  archives  is  even  more  satisfactory  than  that  afforded  by  the 
production  of  an  original  title.     United  States  v.  Rodriguez,  170. 

FORFEITURE. 

Forfeiture  could  only  have  been  incurred  by  unreasonable  delay  or  want  of  effort 
on  the  part  of  the  grantee  to  fulfill  the  conditions  of  the  grant,  and  such  as  to 
raise  the  presumption  that  he  had  abandoned  his  claim.  Martin  v.  United 
States,  146;  Noe  v.  United  States,  162;  United  States  v.  Soto,  182;  McKee  v. 
United  States,  173  ;   United  States  v.  Rose,  197. 

FORGERY. 

To  pronounce  a  grant  a  forgery,  something  more  than  a  suspicion  as  to  its  gen- 
uineness should  be  entertained.     United  States  v.  Rico,  161. 

FRAUD. 

Cases  in  which  fraud  was  alleged.  Confirmed — United  States  v.  Heirs  of  Bernal, 
50.     Rejected — Swat  v.  United  States,  230 ;   United  States  v.  Limantour,  389. 

FREMONT  CASE. 
Decisions  under  the  rulings  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  Fremont  case.  17  How. 
560 ;  Semple  v.  United  States,  37 ;  United  States  v.  Larkin,  41  ;  Yount  v. 
United  States,  43  ;  United  States  v.  Soto,  68 ;  Grimes  v.  United  States,  107  ; 
Pacheco  v.  United  States,  113;  Pico  v.  United  States,  116;  United  States  \. 
Weber,  126  ;  Chaholla  v.  United  States,  130  ;  Pico  v.  United  States,  142  ;  Noe 
V.  United  States,  162;  Pico  v.  United  States,  188;  Nunez  v.  United  States,  191 ; 
Armijo  v.  United  States,  248. 

GENUINENESS  OF  GRANT. 
See  Grants. 


140  INDEX. 

GOVEENOR. 

The  Governor  had  no  power  to  grant  in  colonization,  or  sell  for  a  money  consider- 
ation, the  orchards  and  like  property  of  the  Missions.  Larkin  \.  United 
States,  313. 

GRANT. 

Where  tlic  condition  of  a  grant,  which  has  not  been  approved  by  the  Deputation, 
required  a  house  to  be  built  and  the  land  cultivated  within  one  year  from  its 
date,  and  no  house  was  built  or  cultivation  made  within  six  years  :  Held,  that 
the  claimant  liad,  under  the  rules  of  decision  laid  down  by  the  Supreme 
Court,  no  cqnities  which  entitled  him  to  a  confirmation.  United  States  v. 
Cruz  Cervantez,  9, 

When  the  conditions  of  a  grant  have  been  performed  cypres,  though  no  approval 
has  been  given  by  the  Departmental  Assembly,  the  claim  is  entitled  to  con- 
firmation.     United  States  v.  Reading,  18. 

Although  the  final  grant  in  this  case  was  not  issued  until  the  seventh  of  July, 
1846,  which  date  the  political  branch  of  our  Government  seems  to  have  indi- 
cated as  the  period  of  the  actual  conquest  of  California,  yet  the  Governor 
having  ordered  the  title  to  issue  on  the  eleventh  of  June,  1846,  the  claim  pre- 
sents an  equity  which  must  be  respected  by  the  United  States.  Pico  et  al.  v. 
United  States,  279. 

Where  one  of  two  persons  to  whom  a  grant  was  made  has  exhibited  a  deed  from 
his  cograntee  and  obtained  a  confirmation  of  his  claim  to  the  whole  tract,  the 
cograntee  who  has  presented  his  separate  claim  for  his  half,  and  who  denies 
the  execution  of  the  deed,  is  entitled  to  a  confirmation  as  against  the  United 
States,  and  the  rights  of  the  parties  intersese  will  be  left  to  be  determined  by 
the  ordinary  tribunals.     Thurn  v.  United  States,  298. 

GRANTEE. 
See  Grant. 

INDIAN. 

Indians  had  a  right  to  receive  grants  of  lands  under  the  Mexican  laws  and  to  con- 
vey the  lands  so  granted.      United  States  v.  Sanol,  110. 

ISLANDS. 
The  grant  of  islands  Avere  made  by  the  express  direction  of  the  Superior  Govern- 
ment of  Mexico,  and  the  Governor  was  enjoined  to  grant  the  islands  to  Mex- 
icans, in  order  to  prevent  their  occupation  by  foreigners  who  might  injure  the 
commerce  and  fisheries  of  the  republic,  and  who,  especially  the  Russians, 
might  otherwise  acquire  a  permanent  foothold  upon  them.  United  States  v. 
Osio,  100. 

LAND. 

See  Quantity. 


INDEX.  141 

A  mere  perniission  to  search  for  and  take  possession  of  lands  did  not  bind  the 
Mexican  Government  to  make  a  title,  consequently  the  United  States  arc  not 
required  under  the  treaty  to  recognize  this  claim.  Garcia  v.  United  States, 
157. 

Under  the  laws  of  Mexico  more  than  eleven  leagues  of  land  could  not  be  granted 
in  colonization  to  any  one  person.     United  States  v.  Hartnell,  207. 

The  power  of  the  Mexican  Government  to  grant  lands  in  California  was  unim- 
paired by  the  declaration  of  Congress  that  war  existed,  and  the  prosecution 
of  that  war  by  the  executive,  and  did  not  cease  until  the  actual  conquest  of 
the  country.     Palmer  v.  United  States,  249. 

The  declaration  in  the  projet  of  the  treaty  between  the  United  States  and  Mexico, 
that  no  grants  of  lands  had  been  made  by  the  latter  subsequent  to  May  13th, 

V  1846,  which  declaration  was  stricken  out  by  the  Senate,  cannot  bar  the  rights 
of  persons  claiming  lands  under  grants  made  since  that  day  and  before  actual 
conquest,  those  rights  being  held  sacred  by  the  laws  and  usages  of  civilized 
nations.     Id. 

LIMITATION. 

Where  a  claimant  for  land  has  presented  his  petition  to  the  Board  of  Land  Com- 
missioners, but  has  neglected  to  support  it  by  evidence  within  two  years  there- 
after, such  neglect  does  not  bring  the  claim  within  the  limitation  prescribed  in 
the  thirteenth  section  of  the  Act  of  March  3d,  1851.  Sivat  v.  United  States, 
230. 

MERITORIOUS  SERVICES. 

Ordinary  gi-ants  and  those  for  meritorious  services  are  governed  by  the  same  prin- 
ciples and  regulations.     Teschemacher  v.  United  States,  28. 

MESNE  CONVEYANCE. 
Although  the  description  of  the  land  in  mesne  conveyances  may  be  vague  and  un- 
certain, parol  evidence  may  be  admitted  to  cure  the  defect.     Martin  v.  United 
States,  146. 

MISSIONS. 
See  GovERNOK. 

OCCUPATION. 
See  Settlement. 

The  non-production  of  a  grant  does  not  affect  the  validity  of  the  claim,  the  loss  of 
the  grant  being  proved,  and  long  and  notorious  occupation  of  the  land  estab- 
lished.    United  States  v.  Castro,  125. 

Where  no  grant  either  perfect  or  inchoate  was  made,  nor  any  promise  given  that  a 
grant  would  be  made,  mere  occupation  by  the  petitioner  pending  his  applica- 
tion for  the  land  does  not  constitute  a  valid  claim.  Romero  et  al.  v.  United 
States,  219. 


142  •        INDEX. 

Where  the  archives  contain  no  [evidence  or  trace  of  the  existence  of  a  grant,  the 
Court  will  demand  the  fullest  and  most  satisfactory  proofs  of  possession  and 
occupation  during  the  existence  of  the  former  Government,  under  a  notorious 
and  undisputed  claim  of  title,  and  clear  and  indubitable  evidence  of  the  gen 
uineness  of  the  grant  produced.     United  States  v.  Polack,  284. 

An  inchoate  title  followed  by  juridical  possession  presents  an  equit}^  which  the 
United  States  are  bound  to  respect.  United  States  v.  Enriyht,  239.  See  Pico 
V.  United  States,  188. 

POSSESSION 
See  Occupation. 

POCO  MAS  0  MENOS. 
Where  the  descri})tiou  contained  in  a  grant  and  the  circumstances  of  the  case  jus- 
tify the  belief  that  the  intention  Avas  to  grant  all  the  land  within  the  bounda- 
ries named,  then  the  words  ''jioco  mas  6  menos  "  (a  little  more  or  less)  must  be 
construed  as  operative  to  pass  to  the  grantee  such  fractional  part  of  a  league 
as  may  be  found  in  excess  of  the  quantity  named  in  the  grant.  United  States 
V.  Estudillo,  204.     See  United  States  v.  Fossat,  211. 

PROJET  OF  THE  TREATY. 
See  Land. 

QUANTITY. 

The  limitation  of  quantity  in  the  conditions  of  a  grant  must  govern,  and  the  claim- 
ant confined  to  the  precise  quantity  named.     Marsh  v.  United  States,  301. 

A  claim  is  valid  for  all  the  land  within  the  boundaries  shown  by  the  diseno,  and  is 
not  to  be  restricted  to  the  quantity  named  in  the  grant,  where  it  appears  that 
the  limitation  as  to  quantity  is  clearly  inconsistent  with  the  plain  intent  of  the 
grantor  and  evidently  the  result  of  a  clerical  error.  United  States  v.  Pa- 
checo,  150. 

SEGREGATION. 
See  Severence. 

SERVICES. 
See  Meritorious  Services. 

SETTLEMENT. 

The  time  for  making  a  settlement  on  the  lands  granted  is  limited  to  one  year. 
The  danger  from  savages  before  and  after  the  grant  is  no  excuse  for  not  com- 
plying with  that  condition.     United  States  v.  Fremont,  20. 

SEVERANCE  EROM  PUBLIC  DOMAIN. 

It  is  a  sufficient  severance  from  the  public  domain  when  the  grant  itself  designates 
by  unmistakeable  natural  boundaries  the  limits  of  the  district  within  which  it 
is  to  be  located,  and  where  the  particular  land  granted  is  specified  by  name. 
United  States  v.  Fremont,  20. 


INDEX.  143 

The  objection  that  the  land  claimed  was  not  scj>regated  from  the  public  domain 
may  be  removed  by  furtlier  testimony.  Valhjo  v.  United  States,  174.  See 
Afesa  V.  United  States,  66. 

SURVEY. 
See  BouNDAKiKS. 

SUTTER  GRANTS. 

Cases  adjudicated  under  the  Slitter  grant.  United  States  v.  Murphy,  154  ;  United 
States  V.  Rose,  197;  United  States  v.  C/iana,  1.55;  and  Bcnnitz  v.  United 
States,  104. 

THIRD  PARTIES. 

Parties  claiming  adverse  interests  cannot  intervene  and  obtain  an  adjudication 
upon  their  conflicting  titles.     Martin  v.  United  States,  146. 

TITLE. 
To  constitute  a  definitively  valid  or  complete  title,  two  things  are  necessary — first, 
a  concession  by  the  Governor ;  and  secondly,  the  approval  by  the  Territorial 
Deputation,  or  in  the  event  of  their  refusal  by  the  Supreme  Government. 
United  States  v.  Cruz  Cervantes,  9. 

WAK. 
Sec  Land. 


ERRATA  IN  DECISIONS 


Page  282.  United  States  vs.  Bennett.  At  the  time  the  original  decree  was  drafted  and  en- 
dorsed in  tliis  case  by  the  District  Attorney  as  correct,  P.  De  la  Torre  had  not  yet  been 
appointed  United  States  Attorney. 

Page  219.    Instead  of  "  appealed  by  the  United  States,"  read  "  appealed  by  plaintiflFs." 


]N     APPEXDIX. 

No.      2.    After  granted,  insert  " in  1820  or  1821  by  P.  V.  de  Sola,  confirmed  by  Jose  Castro, 
Nov.  26th,  1835,  and  by  the  Territorial  Deputation." 

After  Archibald,  insert  "  A." 

Insert  "  appeal "  before  dismissed. 

After  Mariano  Castro,  insert  "Alcalde." 

Instead  of  1846,  insert  "1836." 

After  for,  insert  "  Suey  in  San  Luis  Obispo  County," 

After  for,  insert  "Arroyo  de  la  Laguna  in  Santa  Clara  County." 

Included  in  Xo.  5. 

After  1835,  insert  "  by  Jose  Castro  who  had  become  Political  Chief." 

For  Maria  Antonio,  read  "  Maria  Antonia." 

Instead  of  1844,  insert  "1834." 

Instead  of  Santa  Clara,  insert  "Alameda." 

After  Herrera,  insert  "  one  and." 

After  league,  insert  "  and  augmentation  of  three  leagues." 

After  for,  insert  "Albion  liaiicho." 

Insert  1838  instead  of  "1835." 

Read  Manuel  Micheltorena  for  Juan  B.  Alvarado,  and  Juan  B.  Alvarado  for 
Manuel  Micheltorena. 

After  1822,  insert  "  by  P.  V.  de  Sola  and  June  10th,  1823." 

After  Marquinas,  insert  "Viceroy  of  New  Mexico." 

Containing  1,515,197  acres. 

After  1835,  insert  by  Jose  Castro." 

Instead  of  October  13th,  1835,  insert  "December  21st,  1844." 

After  1836,  insert  "  by  N.  Gutierrez." 

After  Vallejo,  insert  "  Military  Commandant  of  the  frontiers  of  the  North. 

Strike  out  granted  in  1833,  and  insert  after  pueblo  of  San  Francisco  "  constituted 
under  an  Act  of  the  Territorial  Deputation  of  Nov.  3d,  1834." 
No.  281.    After  Iturbide,  insert  "  under  a  decree  of  the  thirty-first  of  February,  1822,  passed 
by  the  Provisional  Congress  of  Mexico  in  consideration  of  services  rendered  by  Augus- 
tine Iturbide  in  the  revolution," 
No.  283.    After  1843,  insert  "  by  Manuel  Micheltorena  and  April  20th,  1846." 
No.  287.    Same  title  as  No.  286. 
No.  294.    Instead  of  1845,  insert  "1841." 
No.  297.    After  Jos§  Castro,  Insert  "  as  Prefect." 

L 


No. 

3. 

No. 

9. 

No. 

29. 

No. 

31. 

No. 

41. 

No. 

42. 

No. 

46. 

No. 

62. 

No. 

67. 

No. 

76. 

No. 

83. 

No. 

84. 

No. 

87. 

No. 

103. 

No. 

104. 

No. 

125. 

No. 

Mani 

153. 

No. 

161. 

No. 

166. 

No. 

191. 

No. 

212. 

No. 

229. 

No. 

237. 

No. 

280. 

146  ERRATA    IN    APPENDIX. 

No.  310.    After  Sanchez,  insert  "  Commander  of  the  Presidio  of  San  Francisco." 

No.  323.    For  Carnero,  read  "  Carneros." 

No.  360.    For  Aguila,  read  "Aguilar." 

No.  372.    After  Noriega,  insert  "Military  Commandant." 

No.  398.    After  1822,  insert  "  by  P.  V.  de  Sola." 

No.  409.    After  Noriega,  insert  "Military  Commandant." 

No.  422.  After  Los  Angeles,  insert  "  founded  under  Governor  Felipe  de  Neve  in  1881.  Pos- 
session given  by  Pedro  Fajes,  Sept.  4th,  1786,  declared  capital  of  California  by  Act  of 
May  23d,  1835." 

No.  430.    Instead  of  1847,  insert  "  1837." 

No.  433.    Containing  22,193.50  acres. 

No.  434.    Containing  13,316.10  acres. 

No.  445.    For  Voca,  read  "  Boca." 

No.  456.    For  Sansal,  read  "  Sausal." 

No.  463.    This  claim  is  part  of  Jurupa  No.  361. 

No.  470.    Instead  of  J.  Figueroa,  insert  "J.  J.  Arrillaga." 

No.  478.  Instead  of  1831,  insert  "1834."  Instead  of  Juan  P.  Alvarado,  insert  "Jos6 
Figueroa." 

No.  487.    After  Carrillo,  insert  "  Alcalde  of  Los  Angeles." 

No.  502.    ForPuenta,  read  "Puente." 

No.  521.    For  Arguisola,  read  "Anguisola." 

No.  524.  For  Manuel  Micheltorena,  read  "  Juan  B.  Alvarado,"  and  for  Juan  B.  Alvarado, 
read  "  Manuel  Micheltorena." 

No.  531.    After  1820,  insert  "  by  P.  V.  de  Sola." 

No.  554.    After  Jose  Castro,  insert  "  as  Prefect." 

No.  557.  After  1834,  insert  "  by  Jose  Figueroa,"  and  ins'tead  of  Jose  Figueroa,  insert  "  Pio 
Pico," 

No.  592.    For  Hames,  read  "  Harnes." 

No.  603.    After  Sanchez,  insert  "Justice  of  the  Peace." 

No.  607.    After  Jose  Castro,  insert  "  as  Prefect." 

No.  617.    After  Jose  Castro,  insert  "  as  Prefect." 

No.  619.    After  Castro,  insert  "  Prefect  of  the  Second  District." 

No.  634.    After  1836,  insert  "  by  N.  Gutierrez." 

No.  635.  For  Borgas,  read  "  Bargas,"  and  after  Estrada,  read  "Prefect  of  the  First 
District." 

No.  641.    After  Jose  Castro,  insert  "  as  Commandant  General." 

No.  650.    Insert  1835  in  the  place  of  "  1845." 

No.  653.    After  by,  insert  "  the  viceroyalty  of  Spain  and  in  1835  by." 

No.  679.    After  Estrada,  insert  "  Prefect  of  the  First  District." 

No.  687.    After  Castro,  insert  "  as  Lieutenant  Colonel." 

No.  696.    After  Rodriguez,  insert  "Alcalde." 

No.  746.    See  errata  to  No  2. 

No.  748.    Same  title  as  in  No.  161. 

No,  750.    See  errata  to  No.  2. 

No,  753.    After  Jose  Castro,  insert  "as  Prefect." 

No.  765.    Same  title  as  in  No.  4. 

No.  768.    After  Berreyesa,  insert  "Justice  of  the  Peace." 

No.  770.    Same  title  as  in  No.  173. 

No.  778.    Instead  of  1848,  insert  "  1845." 

No,  786.    After  Vallejo,  insert  "  Military  Commandant  of  the  Northern  Frontier." 

No.  795.    After  Castro,  insert  "  Prefect." 

No.  798.    This  claim  is  part  of  Bosquejo,  No.  182. 

No.  806.    After  Carrillo,  insert  "Justice  of  the  Peace." 

In  Index  to  Claimants,  page  126,  last  line,  for  Borgas,  read  "  Bargas." 

Page  128,  second  and  third  line  from  bottom,  substitute  "  y  Carillo  "  for  "  y  Lataillade,  and 

vice  versa. 


I 


X 


Cases   filed   in     dstrict   Court  u: 
Acts   of   v3on:;ress 

.^. ,  j:rj^s 

Apis,    cTesu:!  .i^chado  '13: 

Apis,    Jose  o:   ftiblo  'i:>l 

Board   of    iructees   of   the 

City  of     'apa 
Bog's",    hjncy^G 
'^■rov.Ti,    ;  enrji 
-:v;iiruan ,    John 
City  of   I'apa 
Cordero,      inoente 
Coutts,    ^siacra 
Coutts,    Gave    Johnson 
Davie s^    '-'horias  2 
de   3o to  , Victoria    'Tidrjes 
Dibblee,    Albert  ..  0 

Dibblee,    Tiioraas  -160 

Dral:enfeld,   Refugio  E  43-: 

Brakenfeld,    Cieorf^e   B 
■2dr-in--ton,    Tricey  A 
Zven,    John-  ^ 

i^'ay,    Joseph 
Fin-ell,    John 
Eisher,    .Villi aa A 
GibbG,    ..lliaii  H 
Kenry,    Stephen  7 
^lo'^an,   lillan  A 
Koilister,    ./.V/. 
Jensen ,   ..:art  Ainius 
Johnson,    Villi an 
Kell3r,    Patrick 
Lace  J?",    J   ncepcion 
Lace  I'',   Sidne^ 
Ivlc  jinerney  ,l.'ar.^aret 
^•^lone,    Drury 
Parker,    H.C- 
Parsons, Luc ena 
Scilir-o,    G.A.  | 

Sneed,    ./.T. 
Soto ,    Raiion 

Soto,   Victoria    Bridges 
Spencer,    Dv!ri^:ht 
Spencer,   21isa 
oton?y ,L'ate   LI 
V/ard,    Jr.    J  •'/alter 
V/i  Hi  aris  ,    .  e  1 1  c  i  ano 
Tollener,   John  F  4:v: 


453 

43: 

44C 

*    *  •) 

■x'tl 

•i3L 

44C 

i'6L 

*  • 

4.52 

I.T. 

440 

ND 

455 

ITI; 

452 

i:d 

432 

,  ^ 

4^6 

L'«  ^ 

445 

i-n: 

442 

ira 

434 

ND 

443 

I  ID 

444 

in) 

4:;:c 

T*^' 

j.\.  ■ 

452 

:;d 

457 

.  -  -  - 

45S 

* . «. 

446 

45C 

432 

ijiliJiy!,ii<ii|^(iM«iii^ 


Cases   fi^ec    la  Jiszvici    Jourt  un^c 


Ic-cs   of   Congress 


R.J^C- -C3 


La  1-oya 
La    Jolla 
La   Jolla 
Las    :ruces 


431     -^ 

43::  ::d 
4o0  i:d 


ilapa 


433  i:..j,   to  and  Inc  -iSG  ID 


'/ 


v^ 


iU-. 


