09-18-06
Chapter One: Introduction
Chapter One
Introduction
T
he neighborhoods of Covenant Hills Homes were truly authentic emulations It is in this tradition that Covenant Hills has
are modeled after the classic Southern of regional architectural styles. The designs been planned. The result is intended to create a
California estate communities of the early were elegant, utilizing only the best materials, timeless, classic community to be admired and
20th century. These communities expressed but were not ostentatious or overly dramatic. sought after for decades to come.
unique dignity and stateliness in architecture Building shapes and forms were often simple,
and landscape design and have become some of but well proportioned. The neighbors, who
the most sought-after addresses in the nation. wished to maintain an understated elegance,
While diverse in both the array of architectural discouraged overly conspicuous or garish
styles and the expression of the individual home towers, turrets, porte-cochères, and entries.
within each style, this variety was contained When European and other imported styles were
within a family of styles, colors, and materials used, they strove to avoid cliché and overly
that came from the surrounding region and romantic interpretations.
lent an underlying sense of harmony.
COVENANT HILLS 1-1

60-81-90
1.1 WHY DESIGN GUIDELINES 1.2 HOW TO USE THIS BOOK the various provisions and restrictions in the
One reason people buy homes in new In order to assist both the Homeowner and Controlling Documents, they are intended to
master-planned communities is to have a their design professionals, the Design Guidelines preserve and maintain the design character,
higher level of comfort with what others have been organized into three sections. The the desirability, and the attractiveness of the
might build around them. In Custom Home first section, What Kind of Home Do I Want?, Custom Home neighborhoods of Covenant
neighborhoods, design guidelines establish shares the vision behind Ladera Ranch and the Hills. Although reasonable efforts have been
standards for elements such as home size, Village of Covenant Hills and helps with the made to eliminate errors or inconsistencies, it
height, location, and style so that the overall visualization of the various design styles that are is the Homeowner’s responsibility to confirm
character of the neighborhood maintains a permitted in Covenant Hills. It is recommended that any improvements constructed on the
general consistency over time. In the case of that the illustrated home styles be reviewed, and Homesite comply with all applicable County,
Covenant Hills, these Design Guidelines also examples in traditional, older neighborhoods State, and Federal zoning and building
support specific design goals for the Village, sought out, to better understand the appearance requirements, regulations, ordinances, codes
in order to achieve articulated architecture, and feel of each style. and laws. These requirements also include the
historical authenticity in design styles, and The second section of the book, Design Ladera Ranch Planned Community Program
“landscape framing” of each Custom Homesite. and Criteria, contains detailed information The overall goal of these Design Guidelines Text, which is the zoning code developed
They have been written to encourage individual about specific home styles, sizes, massing, is to assist in the design of a beautiful home that specifically for Ladera Ranch. In those instances
self-expression in home design, but at the same setbacks, and plantings, as well as other technical fits comfortably into the community and the where a conflict or inconsistency exists between
time allow Custom Homes to complement requirements. This information should be lifestyle of the Homeowner while ensuring the these Design Guidelines, sound construction
each other in a harmonious composition used by the Homeowner and their design Covenant Hills goals are maintained. practices, and applicable laws, the more
reminiscent of the classic communities of professionals in creating plans for the Custom restrictive or stringent requirement shall apply
Southern California. Home. If certain formula or aesthetic criteria are Interpreting the Design Guidelines and control.
confusing, the Design Review Manager should be Understanding the language of the Design These Design Guidelines apply to the
contacted for clarification. Guidelines relies on the definition of three Custom Homes within Covenant Hills;
The third section, Reviews and Approvals, important words: must, should, and may. alternative Design Guidelines will cover other
explains the various steps of the design review Guidelines that include the word “must” or homes built within Covenant Hills.
process, as well as the submissions that are “shall” are required.
required as part of the process. This process Guidelines that use the word “should”
is an important part of building a home in are also required, but the Design Guidelines
Covenant Hills and should be viewed as a recognize that some flexibility may be needed
helpful resource in designing an attractive and such cases will be evaluated on a case-by-
Custom Home that will contribute to the case basis.
surrounding neighborhood. Some guidelines use the word “may” as the
The goal of the design review process is qualifier. These Design Guidelines are entirely
to communicate with the Homeowner and optional.
their design team so that each step of the Occasionally, a situation will arise where no
design process is as efficient as possible. This guideline exists, and the design direction is
These Design Guidelines are intended to can only be achieved when the Homeowner uncertain. In these cases, the Design Review
ensure that the character, values, and vision meets in a timely manner with the Design Manager will utilize basic design principles for
embodied in the master plan for Covenant Hills Review Manager so that Custom Home designs guidance.
will be protected for the long term, and that inconsistent with the Design Guidelines can
every Custom Homesite will be developed to be identified and corrected as soon as possible. Other Controlling Criteria
reinforce and enhance the overall character of Final approval from the Design Review These Design Guidelines and the design
Covenant Hills. Manager is required prior to commencing review process are intended to serve aesthetic
construction of a Custom Home. purposes only and do not replace structural
requirements or building codes. In concert with
1-2 COVENANT HILLS

09-18-06
Chapter One: Introduction
1.3 THE LADERA RANCH COMMUNITY
1.3 THE LADERA RANCH COMMUNITY One of Ladera Ranch’s most distinctive PRIMARY STATISTICS:
Set in the historical ranchland of Rancho features is its focus on the design and character
Mission Viejo, Ladera Ranch is surrounded of its community with small neighborhoods, 6 Villages
by natural open space, ridgelines, arroyos, parks within walking distance, architectural
and views of distant mountains. On the four- diversity, and design authenticity. The 3 Districts
thousand acre site, of which over sixteen LLaaddeerraaLLiiffee eexxcclluussiivvee ccoommmmuunniittyy iinnttrraanneett ccaann
hundred acres are open space preserve, DMB ccoonnnneecctt eevveerryy hhoommee ttoo oorrggaanniizzeedd ccoommmmuunniittyy 4,000 project development acres
Ladera has been creating a new community aaccttiivviittiieess,, mmeessssaaggee bbooaarrddss,, eedduuccaattiioonnaall
that captures the best of the ranching and pprrooggrraammss,, aanndd oorrggaanniizzeedd ssppoorrttss.. 1,600 dedicated open space acres
town building heritage of Southern California.
Six distinct villages are linked together by 2,400 developed acres
the central Sienna Botanica, allowing easy
walking and bike access to shops, elementary 8,100 planned dwelling units
and middle schools, a library, day care, three
community parks, and the six village clubs. The 9 90,000 square feet retail/office/commercial
twenty-three-acre county regional sports park
is a center of league-sponsored play. There are
also three shopping centers for the residents of
Ladera Ranch.
Oak Knoll Village
Bridgepark District Crown Valley Parkway
Commercial and retail
Flintridge Village
Township District
Echo Ridge Village
Avendale Village
Wycliffe District
Antonio Parkway
Terramor Village
Sienna Botanica
Oso Grande Elementary School/
Oso Grande Community Park
Covenant Hills Village boundary
Covenant Hills Village Club
Custom Home neighborhoods
CCoovveennaanntt HHiillllss aass iitt oorriieennttss ttoo tthhee rreesstt ooff LLaaddeerraa RRaanncchh
COVENANT HILLS 1-3

60-81-90
1.4 DESIGN PHILOSOPHY These Design Guidelines are meant to
The creation of an appropriate setting encourage design flexibility without detracting
for a Custom Home requires the thoughtful from, or over imposing on, adjacent neighbors.
interplay of site planning, architectural design, The basic concept is that a maximum building
and landscape. These should be conceived in envelope is defined through a series of setback
an integrated, cohesive manner, rather than and density criteria, with the Homeowner
separate and independent from each other. This controlling the design of the Custom Home
is often difficult, since a family starting out in within that envelope. The result should be a
the process of designing a home of their dreams well-proportioned home situated to provide
is often preoccupied with floor plans and with sufficient breathing room for air, light, and
fine-tuning the elevations. Site planning and landscaping and to provide separation and
landscape sometimes become afterthoughts. visual balance within the neighborhood.
In the classic estate communities of the early Every Custom Home should:
20th century, the composition of house and Express the Homeowner’s individual needs
grounds was approached as a balanced, cohesive and aspirations;
whole. Single-story elements were placed on the Create a massing and setback outcome that
flanks to create the comfortable sense that the provides interest and variety on the street;
home was growing out of the land. The site was Not seem overly imposing in its mass and
graded so the front entry was elevated and the bulk;
house was situated with a certain prominence. Feel like it is growing out of the land and
Landscape plantings were extended down the landscape.
side yards all the way to the street so each
home enjoyed an individual “picture frame”
presentation from the street.
Conceptual mid-block Homesite with deep-recess garage viewed from inside the motor court.
1-4 COVENANT HILLS

09-18-06
Chapter One: Introduction
1.5 THE VILLAGE OF COVENANT HILLS
Remnants of Classic Estate In Touch with the Land
Ranch History Sophistication The layout of Covenant Hills allows for
Remnants Although set short, winding roads that hold tightly to rolling
of orchards and in an historical hillsides. The resulting neighborhoods are small
field walls dot and rustic and intimate and feel like they grew out of, and
the hillsides with mission-ranch are nestled within, the surrounding landforms.
the background setting, the The landscape character is in touch with the
of trees reflective homes are an land and its timeless quality as it reinforces
of historical expression of the natural valleys and ridgelines.
windrows. sophistication
The landscape and
and hardscape accomplishment
treatments, especially at the entries and on of each Homeowner. Each Custom Homesite
Covenant Hills Drive, are extensions of the is framed with landscape to present, and
surrounding ranch lands into the Village. The reinforce, the individual architecture and
two entries reflect the architectural heritage of lifestyle of its Homeowner without visually
nearby Mission San Juan Capistrano. impacting the neighbor’s home. Architectural
styles are authentic, articulated, and well
San Juan detailed, and reflect the quality of the Village
Rusticity and Homeowners.
The
1.5 THE VILLAGE OF COVENANT HILLS neighborhoods Diversity with
Covenant Hills is located at the southerly located within Harmony
end of Ladera Ranch, overlooking the Horno this setting Classic
Valley to the southwest and San Juan Creek of ranchland towns reflect
Valley of Rancho Mission Viejo to the south. extend the the diversity
With the best views, most diverse topography, informality and of values and
and closest proximity to San Juan Capistrano, rusticity of San aspirations of
it has been reserved as the last village to be Juan Capistrano their residents.
developed in Ladera Ranch. into the The homes
The ambiance of the Covenant Hills Village community. The and landscape
results from a complex interplay between five naturalized and settings of
design principle ideas: informal landscape, heavy tree cover, and rural Covenant Hills
road character blend into the adjacent enclaves are also diverse
of low-density, large-lot estate homes. and varied in expression and style. But like other
towns, they are somewhat constrained by the
culture, materials, crafts, and skills of the period
in which they were built. This results in an
underlying harmony and compatibility within a
family of styles and character.
COVENANT HILLS 1-5

60-81-90
Sienna Parkway
O’Neill Drive
Oso Grande Elementary School
Sienna Botanica
Antonio Parkway
OOssoo GGrraannddee CCoommmmuunniittyy PPaarrkk
Covenant Hills Village Club
West Gatehouse limited-edition lots
EEaasstt GGaatteehhoouussee
Yukon Riley Botanica Trail limited-edition lots
typical pocket park
CCoovveennaanntt HHiillllss DDrriivvee
neighborhood park
HHoorrnnoo BBaassiinn
Covenant Hills Village
Ladera Ranch Trail
Covenant Hills
Custom Homesites
1-6 COVENANT HILLS

09-18-06
Chapter One: Introduction
1.6 LET’S TAKE A SHORT VISIT INTO COVENANT HILLS
1.6 LET’S TAKE A SHORT VISIT INTO Progressing down Covenant Hills Drive, After you circle around and head back on The Custom Homes and their surrounding
COVENANT HILLS you appreciate the winding, rural nature of Covenant Hills Drive you enter one of the landscape share a comfortable relationship.
The following is a theoretical account of a trip to and the road as it passes by small citrus groves and Custom-Home neighborhoods and notice that Continuous street trees in the parkways filter
through Covenant Hills: low stone walls that are reminiscent of early these local neighborhoods also feature relaxed, views of the homes, and the plantings between
As you approach the hill that extends from Rancho Mission Viejo. Eventually, Covenant winding streets, narrow in width, and without houses extend all the way to the street, forming
San Juan Capistrano to the south along the Hills Drive leads you to the Covenant Hills hard curbs. They’re occasionally adjoined by an individual “picture frame” for each home.
Antonio Parkway, you see Saddleback Mountain Village Club, with its two pools, tennis courts, unique paving and pull-off parking bays. In When you finally leave Covenant Hills, you
to the northeast and the Custom Homes of play lot, and hacienda club building. You see a several pocket parks, residents can have their cannot help but think about the wonderful
Covenant Hills nestled along the ridgeline to private party—perhaps a club meeting—in one children play close to home, or simply watch community that you are leaving behind as you
the northwest. As you near the crest of the of the meeting rooms that is spilling out into a sunset. You are witness to the spectacular head out into the hustle and bustle of Southern
hill, you turn left on Covenant Hills Drive and the shade beneath an oak tree in an adjoining views afforded by Covenant Hills, including California.
enter the Village through the Mission-inspired courtyard. views of the San Juan Creek valley and the
gatehouse. The Terramor Village Club water park, with Pacific Ocean in the distance. As you continue
You look out over the Village and notice its water slides, swim lagoons, play fountains, to wind your way through the Custom-Home
that no two areas seem exactly the same, partly and skateboard park, is just visible to the west neighborhoods with short streets and cul-de-
because of the undulating landforms and small beyond the Covenant Hills entry. As you drive sacs, you notice several access points to the
clusters of homes, and partly due to the rich through the west gatehouse entry, you pass the ten-mile Ladera Ranch Trail that surrounds the
mix of color, roof patterns, and forms of the Oso Grande Elementary School. community.
homes. Across from the gatehouse are the Sienna Although the landscape and street
Botanica and the Yukon Riley Trail, as well character is informal—almost rural—the
as the beginnings of community trails and Custom Homes represent sophisticated
linear parks that link much of the community evolutions of European and early-American
together. styles reminiscent of the best, classic, estate
communities. Although individual Custom
Homes vary in size, style, and mass, they seem
to have an underlying set of shared qualities
that lead to a rich and well-balanced visual
composition when taken as a whole.
COVENANT HILLS 1-7

60-81-90
Q Q
1.7 FREQUENTLY-ASKED QUESTIONS Do all Homesites have the same setback and height When do I have to start construction of my Custom
requirements? Home?
Q Can I build any type of Custom Home I want in ANo. There are various classifications ASo that the neighborhoods will be built out
Covenant Hills? of Homesites within Covenant Hills in a timely manner, you must commence
AThe interior of your Custom Home is depending on location, size, and visual construction within three years and complete
up to you, but the exterior architectural prominence. The type of Homesite you construction within five years of purchasing
style, size, mass, height, and other attributes have is indicated in your Custom Homesite your Homesite. Failure to do so may result in
must conform to the Design Guidelines. Declaration and is not included in this book. additional charges or in DMB Ladera, LLC having
However, Section II: Design and Criteria, the right to repurchase your Homesite.
describes the specific requirements for each of
Q
What architectural styles are allowed in Covenant the different Homesite types.
Q
Hills? May I choose my own architect and builder?
ANine historical styles are established
as the family of architecture defined Q How important is landscaping in my design AWhile the use of qualified professionals
for Covenant Hills. These styles are Spanish process? is strongly encouraged for all trades,
Revival, Italian Revival, Colonial Revival, AVery important. The neighborhood the selection of your consultant team is your
Craftsman, English Revival, French Revival, character planned for Covenant Hills responsibility. It is strongly encouraged that
Provençal, San Juan Capistrano Rustic, and requires that landscape and architecture all consultants be licensed to practice their
Tuscan. A complete discussion of these styles carefully support each other in a unified overall profession in the state of California.
and their landscapes is set forth in Chapter Two, design. Chapter Five: Landscape Design Criteria,
Historical Styles. offers historical precedents and adequate
detail of style-specific landscape suggestions
and requirements. Designs must be approved
Q
How large of a home can I build? by the Design Review Manager and installed
within ninety days of the building’s Notice of
AEach Homesite has a maximum allowed Completion.
building square footage. Additional
square footage is permitted in certain basement
Q
and attic conditions. This information is How long does it take to get my plan approved?
provided separately in your Custom Homesite
Declaration and is not included in this book. AAlthough the average plan approval time
ranges from six months to one year, many
variables affect the process, including selection
Q
Can I place my Custom Home anywhere on the lot? and approval of consultants, buyer decision-
making, governmental processing, the size of
AYes, as long as you do not encroach into the home, and so on.
the minimum front, side, and rear yard
setbacks identified in Section II: Design and
Criteria and otherwise comply with these
Custom-Home Design Guidelines.
1-8 COVENANT HILLS
