ROOTSANDWINGS
LADERA RANCH’S OFFICIAL COMMUNITY MAGAZINE WINTER 2019
2019
in
IN PICTURES
p.14
P. 4
IN
LADERA
TURNS
P. 8
P. 6

INTHISISSUE...
LETTER FROM
YOUR BOARD
PRESIDENTS
LADERA RANCH COMMUNITY SERVICES (LARCS)
Oak Knoll Village Clubhouse
28192 O’Neill Drive WINTER 2019
Ladera Ranch, CA 92694
949.388.8300 | contact.larcs@laderalife.com
Hours: Monday-Friday: 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Events • Programs • LaderaLife.com • Community Partnerships
Groups & Clubs • Roots and Wings Magazine • Ladera
Happenings
LARCS BOARD OF DIRECTORS
President ...................................................................Armando Rutledge
Vice President ..........................................................................Greg Sink
CFO ......................................................................................Barton Warner
Secretary .................................................................................Jay Rogers
06 Director at Large ..............................................................Rob Campbell
Non-Voting Member ..............................................................Dalia Viera A YEAR IN REVIEW:
LADERA RANCH MAINTENANCE CORPORATION (LARMAC)
Avendale Village Clubhouse 2019 WAS A YEAR OF PROGRESS
1 Daisy Street
Ladera Ranch, CA 92694
949.218.0900 | contact.larmac@laderalife.com
hat a year it has been! 2019 has been a year of progress. From advances in technology, AI,
Hours: Monday-Friday: 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Saturday: 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Tesla, Ring, Alexa and home automation to the progress that our residents have made, it’s
09 16 been exciting to hear how people and families are making life, and our community better.
Membership Cards • LaderaLife Registration
Architectural Plan Submittal • Enforcement Review
Common Area Maintenance • Facility Reservations In this year-in-review issue, we celebrate accomplishments, events and community
W projects that have shaped the year. Community organizations such as the Ladera
LARMAC BOARD OF DIRECTORS
President ................................................................................Joe Ribotto Rancho Chamber of Commerce, Ladera Ranch Civic Council, LARMAC and LARCS Boards
Vice President ............................................................Jacob Whitehead and Committees have worked diligently to keep Ladera thriving, connected, looking good and engaged.
Treasurer ........................................................................Samantha Talley
Secretary .....................................................................Chase Fitzpatrick We hope that you’ll enjoy the Year in Review in Photos bonus pages.
Assistant Secretary ............................................................Cary Sullivan
17
As we look ahead towards 2020, we spotlight a handful of residents who moved to Ladera Ranch in the
G4S Security (24/7) ........................................................949.351.9253
Cox Sports Park and Field Conditions......................949.582.2414 first few years of the community’s development and growth. They share some of their early and fondest
FirstService Residential CA .........................................949.448.6000
03 Message from your LARCS and LARMAC Board Presidents 15241 Laguna Canyon Road memories about visiting the Oak Knoll Village Clubhouse which served as the new home sales center,
Irvine, CA 92618 entering the lottery to buy a home and moving here.
04 Winter Events fsresidential.com
In the spirit of celebration LARCS invites residents to enter the Ladera 20 in 2020 Logo Design
06 Family Holiday Traditions Contest (see page 8). The winning design will be used to commemorate Ladera Ranch’s 20 Year
As a service to Ladera Ranch residents (“Participants”), LARCS makes
Anniversary.
available various service providers such as instructional and recreation class
07 LARMAC: Your HOA at Work instructors, sports leagues, social events and others that may be added from
time to time (collectively, the “Providers”), which agree to provide classes
and other activities to Participants. However, neither LARCS, LARMAC, LARMAC has been busy with large projects including the playground replacement, pool resurfacing
08 Ladera Turns 20 in 2020 FirstService Residential CA, DMB Ladera, nor any of their directors or
officers (collectively, the “Ladera Parties”) recommend or endorse any of the and bench/trash receptacle replacement projects. This summer the Pool Status page was added to
Providers or any classes, activities, information, advice or services provided LaderaLife.com making it easier for you to check the status of your favorite pool, plunge, wading pool
08 20th Anniversary Logo Design Contest by such Providers (collectively, the “Products”). The Ladera Parties are not
responsible for the accuracy, reliability or quality of any Product provided to or the water park before packing up the family. A new ‘Projects and Landscape’ section was recently
Participants by or on behalf of any Provider. Any reliance upon any Products
10 LARCS: Ladera Lifestyle of a Provider shall be at the Participant’s sole risk. introduced to keep you current on the latest projects and landscape maintenance schedules.
The Ladera Parties expressly disclaim any and all warranties, expressed or
12 Recreation Programs implied, including, without limitation, warranties of merchantability and We have a fun holiday season planned for you. LARMAC is in the process of installing the holiday lights and
fitness for a particular purpose, with respect to any Product any Participant
LARCS will hold the Holiday Decorating Contest for individual homes and neighborhoods, which is always a
obtains from a Provider. In no event shall the Ladera Parties be liable for
14 Photos: A Year in Review any direct, indirect, incidental, punitive or consequential damages of any fun experience. Please plan to attend the Miracle on Mercantile Way event on Saturday, Dec. 7 (see page 5).
kind whatsoever with respect to any Product or information provided by,
on or behalf of, a Provider. Since individual needs vary from Participant to Santa Visits will be held at the Covenant Hills Clubhouse, a new location on Friday, Dec. 6 which will
16 Teens in Ladera Ranch Participant, the Ladera Parties suggest that each Participant conduct the be a collection site for Toys For Troops.
necessary due diligence to ensure that any Product and/or Provider selected
for use by a Participant is appropriate for such Participant’s circumstances.
17 Nominations for Volunteer Awards LARCS reserves the right, as its sole discretion and without any obligation, Enjoy this year-in-review issue of Roots and Wings magazine. We wish you and yours a warm holiday season
at any time to withdraw any benefit of discount and to cancel any provider.
and look forward to seeing you around town and at the holiday events. ◘
17 Community Partner: Cox Communications Your attendance at LARCS and/or LARCS Partnership events constitutes your
permission to LARCS and/or parties designated by LARCS to photograph
you and your family members, including minor children, and to use such
18 Chamber of Commerce and Civic Council Updates photographs in all forms of media and any and all promotional purposes
including advertising, publicity, display, audiovisual, exhibition, commercial
and editorial use. The term “photograph” as used herein, encompasses
still photographs, audio recording and motion picture footage. LARCS
19 Toys for Troops & Goodwill Donation Site
reserves the right to reproduce and/or authorize reproduction and use
of such photographs for use in all promotional markets. LARCS and any
of its associates, affiliates, designated directors, officers, agents, and
employees are not liable for any claims of civil violation of privacy as result of
photographs taken at LARCS events.
Joe Ribotto Armando Rutledge
President, Ladera Ranch President, Ladera Ranch
Maintenance Corporation Community Services
(LARMAC) (LARCS)
WWIINNTTEERR 22001179 || LLAADDEERRAALLIIFFEE..CCOOMM 3

HOLIDAY DECORATING CONTESTS NEW TO LADERA? SATURDAY, DECEMBER 7
MIRACLE ON MERCANTILE WAY EVENT
NEW HOMEOWNER
1:00 - 5:00 P.M. | 25692 CROWN VALLEY PKWY. STE J-2
Get into the holiday spirit by entering your home or
neighborhood in the annual Holiday Decorating Contest.
Join family, friends and neighbors to kick off the holiday
Winners will receive a gift card and yard sign to display RECEPTION
season. The event will end with Santa lighting a 60 foot tree.
throughout the holiday season.
TUESDAY
Food will be available for purchase
FEBRUARY 11 at restaurants in the Mercantile West shopping center.
Individual Home
Enter in one of the following categories:
6:30 - 8:00 P.M. • Photos with Santa with a professional photographer
• Most Creative Use of Lights
• Cookie decorating
• Best Use of Theme
• Ornament decorating
• Classic/Traditional Ladera Ranch
• Caricature artists
• Best Yard Display Community Services
(LARCS) hosts a casual • Write a letter to Santa
reception for new • Winter themed photo ops **Bring your own camera
Entry Deadline: Noon, December 2
homeowners to meet • Hot chocolate
Resident Judging: December 5 - 17
and have fun.
• Toy for Troops collection site
To vote for your favorites, visit LaderaLife.com starting RSVP on LaderaLife.com
December 5 (online voting only)
Neighborhood
Participating street(s) in a neighborhood will be judged
on four separate criteria:
• Originality
• Creativity
SUNDAY, DECEMBER 15
• Curb Appeal
LIVE NATIVITY
• Use of Lighting
WINTER
*Entries must have at least half of the street
participating in the same neighborhood 5:00 P.M. ACTIVITIES, 5:30 P.M. NATIVITY| TOWN GREEN
Witness the miracle of the very first Christmas. Come share in
Entry Deadline: Noon, December 10
the joy of the season with your community, family and friends
Judging: Saturday, December 14, 5:00 p.m. - 9:00 p.m.
featuring the story of Christmas, live animals, Christmas carols,
*Please be advised residents must obtain an
kids crafts, visit from Santa and refreshments.
Encroachment Permit from the County of Orange if
holiday displays including string of lights are extended
A LARCS partnership event with Hope Crossing Church
over public rights of way. For more information, visit
community group.
ocpublicworks.com
SUNDAY, DECEMBER 22
MENORAH LIGHTING
FRIDAY, DECEMBER 6
SANTA VISITS
4:30 P.M. ACTIVITIES | TOWN GREEN
4:00 - 8:00 P.M. | COVENANT HILLS VILLAGE CLUBHOUSE
Enjoy the warmth and feeling of community at the Ladera
Ranch Festival of Lights. This will be a kosher event in
Santa will listen to holiday wish lists and take
partnership with the Chabad Jewish Center of Mission Viejo
photos with your family.
and will be the 17th annual Menorah Lighting. There will be
Please bring your own camera to capture the music, dancing, dreidels, face painting, crafts and traditional
moment. Line will close at 7:30 p.m. foods for all.
Toys for Troops collection site.
2019
Spring Celebration Community Garage Sale
Saturday, April 4 Go Green Ladera
Saturday, April 25
4 WINTER 2019 | LADERALIFE.COM WINTER 2019 | LADERALIFE.COM 5

Solar array project at Cox Sports Park
Ure family photo in matching holiday pajamas MAINTAINING LADERA AS A PREMIER ORANGE COUNTY COMMUNITY
by Joe Ribotto
Ladera Families Share their Fondest Holiday Traditions s we approach the holidays and look back on 2019, it has been an exciting and productive year for LARMAC.
This year, some major projects were completed: the installation of the new irrigation system throughout Ladera,
and the solar array at Cox Sports Park. The completion of both projects has already resulted in
A significant cost savings. Additionally, much of the common area lighting was converted to LED
which resulted in both cost savings and improved safety for our residents.
Major landscape projects were completed including the renovation of the center median along
O’Neill from Sienna to Antonio, a much-needed complete makeover of Cox Sports Park Soccer Field B,
and landscape improvements at Cherry Plunge and Arroyo Park. Additionally, significant time and
Rebecca Nazzal
effort has been devoted to working with the Orange County Fire Authority to remove fire prone
Christmas Train
plants surrounding Ladera Ranch. Other significant projects include the playground replacement at
Chaparral Park is home to the tallest
The Nazzal family always visits the Irvine Christmas train with other
Dawnwood and Chaparral parks, the replacement of the pool deck at the Oak Knoll recreation pool, play structure in Ladera.
Ladera Ranch families (in matching pjs or outfits). We do not have a
and the renovation of kitchens and bathrooms at several clubhouses.
Cristina Nebot lot of extended family who live locally so this is a special and exciting
Christmas Cookie Party thing that our kids get to do with family friends who are like cousins,
All of the projects completed in 2019, as well as future projects contribute to LARMAC’s mission
aunts and uncles. It is meaningful to us to have our village to raise
For the last four years, Cristina has invited friends to sign our kids and celebrate the holidays together. which is to manage and maintain Ladera Ranch as one of Orange County's premier master-
up for her annual (Homemade) Cookie Exchange, “the most planned communities.
delicious party of the year.” The theme is Christmas cookies
and each person bakes approximately six dozen. Christmas
LARMAC is excited to finish out the year with the installation of spectacular holiday lighting
attire is always encouraged and Cristina gives fun prizes for
displays throughout Ladera Ranch. Back by popular demand are the falling star icicle lights in
the best, most unique and festive cookies. At the end of the
the roundabouts! ◘
evening, each guest fills a container to take home cookies
and donate the extra cookies to families needing some
holiday cheer.
New playground at Dawnwood Park.
Darcy and Nathan Ure
2019 COMPLETED PROJECTS
Drew Brasch A Christmas Carol Play
Family Trip to We have the tradition of going to see the play 'A Christmas
Arizona Carol' every Christmas with our grandparents. Definitely gets
• Clubhouse kitchen renovations at Avendale and Flintridge • Cox Sports Park Soccer Field B renovation
us in the Christmas spirit. We love going to church together,
For as long as I can getting everyone matching pjs and decorating the Christmas • LED pole light conversions (436 fixtures throughout Ladera) • Park landscape renovations at Arroyo, Brittlestar, Linear,
remember, we have tree together. • Oak Knoll recreation pool deck and landscape renovation and Eton parks
traveled to Arizona for
• Astoria mailbox replacement • Cherry Plunge landscape renovation
Thanksgiving. Every
year we enjoy a great • Club and park trash receptacle replacement • South O'Neill center median and parkways landscape
Thanksgiving feast, • Playground structure replacement at Dawnwood and and tree project
then my Papa, sister
Chaparral parks
and I jump in the
freezing, unheated pool after our
• Tennis court resurface at Avendale and Flintridge COMING SOON:
meal. Papa is the only person who gets excited about • Cox Sports Park field 4 baseball net extension • Clubhouse restroom refurbishment at Avendale
this tradition. • Pickleball court line addition (Avendale Tennis Courts) • Wagsdale Dog Park hydration station replacement
• Cox Sports Park Soccer Field A artificial turf sideline • Updated homeowner plant and exterior paint options
Next are the Christmas lights. Thankfully I get the
easy job of holding the lights and pretending I didn’t improvement • Playground replacement at Pleasanton park
hear any four-letter words from my dad (and I’m not
talking about “Noel”). Then, the family decorates the Jamie O'Keefe
Christmas tree and we rock out to Christmas carols in Hanukkah Party
our pjs. By far the best tradition is the time we spend
Everything is centered around food. We go to my mom's
with friends and family.
house on the first night of Hanukkah and make latkes and LARMAC
have dinner, light candles and open presents. BOARD OF
DIRECTORS
We also have a big Hanukkah with all our family (cousins,
aunts, uncles, etc.) where we have dinner and latkes and then
we always have an epic white elephant gift exchange. ◘ Joe Ribotto Jacob Whitehead Samantha Talley Chase Fitzpatrick Cary Sullivan
President Vice President Treasurer Secretary Assistant Secretary
6 WINTER 2019 | LADERALIFE.COM WINTER 2019 | LADERALIFE.COM 7

As Ladera Ranch approaches its 20th year
anniversary as a community, neighbors
reflect on the early years and where they MacCartie Family Doyle Family
are today.
The MacCartie
family moved to
Ladera Ranch from
Chicago in 2000
IN for Kevin's new job.
They purchased
LADERA
their first home in
Ladera because
TURNS
they would look off in of the small town
the distance - at the community feel,
land and some cows the amenities, and
- as the beginning of they knew it would The Doyle Family moved to Ladera Ranch in February of 2001
Ladera Ranch was be an amazing for a larger home to raise their family. At the time homes in
being established. place to raise their south Orange County were going fast and they had to wait in
Eventually their names were drawn kids. Laura remembers the day they moved in. “As I looked out lines to place deposits on homes they were interested in. They
from the housing lottery to purchase a home which was “the of my kitchen window, all I could see were wide open, dirt lots. were lucky to land a home in Flintridge Village’s Hampton Road
best call we’ve ever received” said Ann Marie. Someone had They were just starting the framework of Chaparral Elementary development. At the time, Ladera Ranch ended at Flintridge
fallen out of escrow and they were next on the list! School with nothing beyond that. I never could have imagined and there was nothing south of that village.
what Ladera would grow into 20 years later” said Laura.
The Dolye family lived in the same home in Flintridge Village
With a 2 1/2 year-old and a 6 month-old in tow, they moved
to Bramford Street located in the Sarasota neighborhood on Today, the MacCartie family lives in their third Ladera home. for 15 years where they have made some of their dearest
December 19, 1999. The first item brought into their home was They moved to Orlando, Florida for one year in 2010 and life-long friends. Today they live in Covenant Hills. "Raising
a pre-decorated Christmas tree. That night, Jeff put lights up couldn’t wait to return to Ladera Ranch. our kids on our street has been an incredible gift that I don’t
believe would have happened anywhere but here. Friday
on the roof for the holidays - the Jennisons were home!
Laura joined the 2001 Babies playgroup when Kyleen was six nights in the cul-de-sac, Halloween celebrations in the pocket
After living in the same home in Oak Knoll Village for 12 weeks old. To this day, they count these families as some of park and giant waterslides right in the middle of the street are
years, the Jeninisons moved to Clifton Heights in the their closest friends. Their kids have grown up together and some of our fondest memories,” said Sarah.
Flintridge Village in 2011. It was a tough decision to leave a they celebrate many holidays with one another, as well as
Jennison Family neighborhood that was filled with people they considered vacation together. Most recently, nine families, 43 people, all “We cannot talk about raising our kids in Ladera without
family, but as their from Ladera, went on a cruise together through the Caribbean referencing the July 4th Celebration. In 18 years we have never
family grew to having and Mexico. They have created many annual traditions with missed a single celebration. Hands down, it’s the best event of
In 1998 while driving to a USC football game, Ann Marie four children in the friends, such as, celebrating St. Patrick’s Day at Arroyo Trabuco the year. Our kids never want to be anywhere else that day. It is
Jennison read an Orange County Register article about a new span of 10 years, every year and hosting the annual Father/Son Turkey Bowl at magical!” added Sarah.
community that would have cul-de-sacs, clubhouses, splash the extra space was Cox Sports Park every Thanksgiving.
playgrounds, parks and villages that would draw residents The Doyles are founding members of Holy Trinity Catholic
welcomed.
from their homes to build friendships. Immediately Ann Marie Laura shared "Moving to Ladera Ranch was one of the best Church and are still active parishioners. Sarah was the
and Jeff knew that Ladera Ranch was the place for them. decisions we ever made. We have been blessed with the most first resident board member on the LARCS (Ladera Ranch
amazing friends who we now consider family. We have taken Community Services) Board of Directors and served as
The Jennisons had one child with one on the way. They full advantage of everything Ladera has to offer including President; Sarah was awarded the Volunteer of the Year award
became obsessed with reading about the plans for Ladera the pools, parks, sports teams, restaurants (The Ranch and in 2008. “We have enjoyed being grownups at the summer
Ranch and took frequent drives to Oso and Antonio where Diho Siam being two of our favorites) and local businesses. concerts - attending without our kiddos and enjoying all that
No matter where life takes us, the memories we have made in Ladera has to offer." ◘
Ladera Ranch will be with us forever!"
Ladera Ranch
20th Anniversary LOGO CONTEST
Ladera Ranch is celebrating its 20th Anniversary throughout 2020 and invites the
community to participate in its logo design competition aimed at deriving an attractive
and meaningful commemorative logo for the year-long celebration. Participation is free
and a special prize will be awarded to the winner.
Visit LaderaLife.com for details.
8 WINTER 2019 | LADERALIFE.COM WINTER 2019 | LADERALIFE.COM 9

EVENTS
• Summer Concert Series: introduced two new
bands
• Annual July 4th Celebration (Freedom Run,
Community Parade, Teen Zone and Fireworks)
• Added Teen Retro Game and Teen Movie and
Haunted Maze Nights
• New Homeowners Welcome Reception for over
250 residents
Added three new partnership events: James Ransom • Introduced two new events: Mother’s Day Muffins
Memorial 5K, Barre3 and YogaSix in the Park and Ladies Night Out Wintery Wooden Sign
July 4th Celebration Workshop
Mother’s Day Muffins and
Masterpieces
Teen Movie Night and Haunted Maze
COMMUNICATIONS
• Enhanced LaderaLife.com with new
Pool Status page
• Increased resident written articles in
PROGRAMS
Roots & Wings
• Implemented new and
• New Projects and Improvement
improved tennis program
sections added to LaderaLife.com
• Implemented new Men’s
Ladies Night Out Wintery
Adult Softball League
Wooden Sign Workshop
• Increased the number of
recreation programs and
classes in the community
CLUBS AND GROUPS
• Continued Community Partnerships
with Ladera Rancho Chamber of
Commerce and Ladera Ranch Civic
Council
• Increased the number of club and
community group offereings for LARCS
residents
BOARD OF
DIRECTORS
Armando Rutledge Greg Sink Jay Rogers Barton Warner Rob Campbell Dalia Viera
President Vice President Secretary CFO Director Non-Voting Member
10 WINTER 2019 | LADERALIFE.COM WINTER 2019 | LADERALIFE.COM 11

RECREATION PROGRAMS RECREATION PROGRAMS
RECREATION PROGRAMS RECREATION PROGRAMS
Classes are open to all Ladera Ranch residents. FAMILY CPR & CHOKING RELIEF STROLLER STRIDES TEEN YOGA AND MINDFULNESS
To register, please reference the website listed with Register at babylovencp.com Ages 7+ Register at laderaranch.fit4mom.com Ages 18+ Ages 12 - 17
each class. This class covers CPR and Choking Relief skills for adults, children and infants. Stroller Strides is a fitness program that moms can do with their babies. These These classes are offered for the teenager who is discovering life and
Students will get to use CPR manikins for hands on practice. This class is great classes are no walk in the park, but a full cardio and resistance workout. Classes connection with their body. As they take time to stop, be still, breathe, and relax
EARLY CHILDHOOD for parents, grandparents, sitters, nannies and siblings. This class does not are taught by certified fitness instructors and accommodate all fitness levels. their minds; this experience gives them an opportunity to develop their own
provide certification cards and is for self-education purposes. Unlimited classes per month. First class is FREE! One-time Registration Fee of skills of mindfulness. Our Teen Yoga class builds self-esteem and health.
($95). Stroller Strides meets year-round.
Register at svmusictogether.net Ages 0 - 4
Sat / Dec 7 / 10:00 - 11:30 am / $50 / Avendale Tu / Jan 14 - Apr 7 / 5:30 - 6:15 pm / $220 / Avendale
MUSIC TOGETHER Sat / Jan 4 / 10:00 - 11:30 am / $50 / Avendale Mon - Fri / 9:00 - 10:00 am / $75 month / Cox Sports Park
RESTORATIVE YOGA
Sat / Feb 1 / 10:00 - 11:30 am / $50 / Avendale
Families participate together in songs, rhythmic rhymes, movement and SUPER SOCCER STARS
Ages 18+
instrumental play. We create fun, informal and musically rich setting that
PERFORMING ARTS Register at la.supersoccerstars.com Ages 1 - 10 Appropriate for all seeking the benefits of a combination of gentle hatha
supports many learning styles of children and adults. No class on Feb 17.
Super Soccer Stars offers child-development soccer classes for ages 1-10 years and deep restorative work. Improve range of motion and joint mobility while
old. With the lowest child-to-coach ratios in OC, Super Soccer Stars teaches reducing pain and the effects of stress. Designed to build strength and the
Th / Jan 9 / 9:15 - 10:00 am / FREE / Flintridge GUITAR LESSONS
soccer skills in a fun, non-competitive and educational environment. power of the breath to heal and vitalize the body. Beginners welcome!
Mon / Jan 13 - Mar 23 / 10:30 - 11:15 am / $207 / Flintridge Register at rongorman.com Ages 10+
No classes on Feb 14 & 16.
Mon / Jan 13 - Mar 23 / 4:15 - 5:00 pm / $207 / Flintridge Learn to play songs of your choice in this year round music class. This class
Tu / Jan 14 - Apr 7 / 6:30 - 7:15 pm / $220 / Avendale
Th / Jan 16 - Mar 19 / 9:15 - 10:00 am / $207 / Flintridge is designed for beginners as well as returning students. The atmosphere is
Sun / Jan 12 - Mar 8 / 9:00 - 9:40 am / $206 / Wagsdale Field/ Ages 1 - 2 (Parent
Th / Jan 16 - Mar 19 / 10:15 - 11:00 am / $207 / Flintridge always friendly and great time is assured for all. Students must bring their own
& Me)
AQUATICS
guitar to class.
HOLIDAYS WITH MUSIC TOGETHER Sun / Jan 12 - Mar 8 / 9:50 - 10:30 am / $206 / Wagsdale Field / Ages 2 - 3
Sun / Jan 12 - Mar 8 / 9:00 - 9:45 am / $206 / Wagsdale Field / Ages 3 - 4
This class follows the same format as a regular Music Together class but Tu / Jan 7 - Feb 4 / 4:30 - 5:30 pm / $100 / Flintridge Sun / Jan 12 - Mar 8 / 10:35 - 11:20 am / $206 / Wagsdale Field / Ages 3 - 4 Register at evolutionswim.com
features holiday songs and music. Sun / Jan 12 - Mar 8 / 9:50 - 10:40 am / $206 / Wagsdale Field / Ages 4 - 5
GATORS SWIM CLUB
SPORTS AND FITNESS Sun / Jan 12 - Mar 8 / 10:45 - 11:45 am / $206 / Wagsdale Field / Ages 5 - 7
Mon / Dec 2 & 9 / 10:30 - 11:15 am / $32 / Flintridge Sun / Jan 12 - Mar 8 / 11:25 - 12:25 pm / $206 / Wagsdale Field / Ages 7 - 10 The Gators Swim Club is a competitive and conditioning swim team. Times
Mon / Dec 2 & 9 / 4:15 - 5:00 pm / $32 / Flintridge LADERA RANCH TENNIS-JUNIORS PROGRAM Sun / Jan 12 - Mar 8 / 11:50 am - 12:50 pm / $291 / Wagsdale Field / Ages 5 - 7 subject to change due to enrollment. Annual USA registration additional. Swim
Th / Dec 5 & 12 / 9:15 - 10:00 am / $32 / Flintridge (United) Team meets year-round.
Th / Dec 5 & 12 / 10:15 - 11:00 am / $32 / Flintridge
Register at laderaranchtennis.com Ages 4+
Fri / Jan 10 - Mar 6 / 9:00 - 9:40 am / $206 / Cox Sports Park / Ages 1 - 2 (Parent
Ladera Ranch Tennis is the official year-round tennis program of Ladera Ranch. & Me) Mon - Fri / 3:30 - 4:30 pm / Avendale / Group 3 (Ages 10 & under)
Ladera Ranch Tennis, partnering with Love Tennis offers a top quality tennis Fri / Jan 10 - Mar 6 / 9:50 - 10:30 am / $206 / Cox Sports Park / Ages 2 - 3 Mon - Fri / 3:30 - 5:00 pm / Avendale / Group 4 Silver (Ages 10 & under)
ENRICHMENT program under the supervision of Billy Casas, Director of Tennis and Coach Fri / Jan 10 - Mar 6 / 10:35 - 11:20 am / $206 / Cox Sports Park / Ages 3 - 4 Mon - Fri / 4:30 - 5:30 pm / Avendale / Group 5 (Ages 11+)
Brian Pham. Ladera Ranch Tennis offers private and semi-private lessons Fri / Jan 10 - Mar 6 / 2:20 - 3:05 pm / $206 / Cox Sports Park / Ages 3 - 4 Mon - Fri / 5:30 - 7:00 pm / Avendale / Group 6 Silver (Ages 11+)
BRINGING BABY HOME as well as group classes and camps. All tennis programming is available for Fri / Jan 10 - Mar 6 / 3:10 - 4:00 pm / $206 / Cox Sports Park / Ages 4 - 5 Mon - Fri 5:00 - 7:00 pm & Sat 8:00 - 10:00 am / Avendale / Group 6 Gold (Ages
Register at christa.mantey@gmail.com Ages 18+ beginner to advanced players. Private lessons, classes and social events are 9 - 14)
Calling all expecting and new parents! Even the strongest relationships are also available for adult players. For pricing please email LoveTennisInquiries@ YOGA
strained during the transition to parenthood. Gottman’s Bringing Baby Home gmail.com. Yellow Ball + requires coach approval.
course is a research-based workshop supporting couples for life with baby and Register at pearlsforlife.org
insights on growing closer together as a parenting team. Mon - Th / Starts Jan 6 / 3:00 - 4:00 pm / Covenant Hills / Red Ball (ages 4-8)
Mon - Th / Starts Jan 6 / 3:00 - 4:00 pm / Covenant Hills / Orange Ball (ages 6-10) TODDLER STORY TIME YOGA
Sun / Feb 2 & 9 / 9:00 am - 4:00 pm / $250 per couple / Avendale Mon - Th / Starts Jan 6 / 4:00 - 5:30 pm / Covenant Hills / Green Dot (ages 8-11) Ages 1- 5
Mon - Th / Starts Jan 6 / 4:00 - 5:30 pm / Covenant Hills / Yellow Ball (ages 8-15) Combines quiet, educational experiences with age appropriate yoga exercises
Mon - Th / Starts Jan 6 / 5:30 - 7:00 pm / Covenant Hills / Yellow Ball+ for toddlers. A fun way for your child to learn the basics of yoga while moving,
playing and making friends. Creative yoga moves, music, and movement are
SKYHAWKS BASEBALL TOTS used to tell a story to introduce the beauty of yoga to toddlers.
Register at skyhawks.com Ages 3.5 - 6
Baseball Tots uses a variety of fun games to engage kids while teaching the Tu / Jan 14 - Apr 7 / 3:30 - 4:15 pm / $220 / Avendale
sport of baseball and developing fundamental skills. The goal is to build fitness,
KIDS YOGA
muscle coordination, baseball fundamentals and create a love of the game. INTRO TO GATORS (NOVICE SWIM TEAM)
Ages 6 - 11
Ages 5+
These classes are offered for the school age child who is discovering life and
Fri / Jan 17 - Feb 14 / 3:30 - 4:10 pm / $65 / Oak Knoll / Ages 3.5 - 4.5 We provide a 45-minute workout Monday -Thursdays during the summer, and
connection with their bodies. Kids Yoga helps build self-esteem and health.
Fri / Jan 17 - Feb 14 / 4:20 - 5:00 pm / $65 / Oak Knoll / Ages 4.5 - 6 our coaches will work with your child to teach him/her the four major swim
This class is a fun way for kids to learn the basics of the practice and grow and
CPR/AED/FIRST AID CERTIFICATION strokes. This program is offered to our students that have a working knowledge
SKYHAWKS MINI HAWK MULTI SPORT develop their skills.
Register at babylovencp.com Ages 7+ of the freestyle, backstroke and breaststroke. Intro to Gators meets year-round
Register at skyhawks.com Ages 2 - 5
Class covers CPR, choking relief and use of an Automated External Defibrillator
Tu / Jan 14 - Apr 7 / 4:30 - 5:15 pm / $220 / Avendale
for adults, children and infants. Students will use videos, CPR Manikins & AEDs Introduce your little superstar to sports in our most popular program! This Mon - Th / 4:30 - 5:15 pm / Please call for pricing / Avendale
for practice. Students receive a Heartsaver CPR/AED/First Aid certification card, baseball and soccer class uses age-appropriate games and activities to explore
valid for two years. There will be an optional First Aid segment at the end of the balance, hand/eye coordination, and skill development. Parent participation
class. may be required for younger ages. No classes on Jan 20 & Feb 17.
Sat / Dec 7 / 10:00 - 11:00 am / $85 / Avendale Mon / Jan 13 - Feb 24 / 9:30 - 10:10 am / $65 / Oak Knoll / Ages 2 - 3.5
Sat / Jan 4 / 10:00 - 11:00 am / $85 / Avendale Mon / Jan 13 - Feb 24 / 10:20 - 11:00 am / $65 / Oak Knoll / Ages 3.5 - 5
Sat / Feb 1 / 10:00 - 11:00 am / $85 / Avendale
12 WINTER 2019 | LADERALIFE.COM FOR MORE INFORMATION VISIT LADERALIFE.COM 1133

2019
Sponsored by:
14 WINTER 2019 | LADERALIFE.COM WINTER 2019 | LADERALIFE.COM 15

Are you or someone you know making a difference in Ladera Ranch?
Help us identify the many outstanding volunteers that are
making a difference every day in our community.
Category information and nomination forms are available on
LaderaLife.com. The deadline to submit a nomination form is
5:00 p.m. on April 3.
To learn more about the LARCS Volunteer Recognition Program
and other Ranch Hand volunteer opportunities,
by Suhina Sharma
please visit LaderaLife.com.
ith the start of the new school year, the Teen Leadership Council
2019 Volunteer Award Recipients
(TLC) has appointed new members to be a part of this year’s Council.
W TLC is excited to hear some of the new members’ creative ideas
regarding the planning of annual events to ensure they are enjoyable for all.
Below are some activities organized by TLC for the year ahead.
Every year, the community kicks-off the holiday season with the COMMUNITY PARTNER
DECEMBER: Tree Lighting Miracle on Mercantile Way and Tree Lighting in which children and
parents are both able to enjoy a multitude of fun activities: photos
Ceremony and Letters to Santa
with Santa, winter-themed photo opportunities, delicious winter
treats, the chance to make a contribution to Toys for Troops, and
last but not least, the lighting of the 60 ft tree at Town Green. TLC
ensures that young children have the opportunity to write letters
to Santa and receive a letter in response, written by Santa
himself!
MARCH: Spring Celebration Spring Celebration is a signature event in Ladera Ranch
and TLC hosts a variety of spring activities to keep children
engaged in the hunt for Easter eggs!
TLC works hard every year to put on a memorable Teen Zone
JULY: July 4th Teen Zone
Cox Paves Way for Smarter Homes, Business in Ladera Ranch
during the July 4th Celebration with exciting activities for teens
in grades 6 to 12.
It’s amazing how quickly technology evolves. It’s projected the average household will have 50 internet-enabled devices by next year. Once
limited to the imagination, consumer demand is strong for home automation features and smart appliances such as wifi-enabled refrigera-
tors and washing machines. The rapid increase in internet-enabled devices and new technology continues to make our lives easier and helps
businesses run more efficiently. But how?
Ladera Ranch Community Services 2020 Scholarship Opportunities The backbone of technological advancement is a strong infrastructure. With rapid deployment of gigabit internet speeds to customers in
Ladera Ranch, Cox Communications is enabling smarter homes, businesses and cities by delivering ultra-fast speeds throughout the com-
munity. Gigabit internet speeds allow users to:
The LARCS Board is proud to offer scholarship opportunities for teen residents of Ladera Ranch who will be
• Run all internet-enabled devices at the same time
attending a college, university, local trade school or junior college in the fall of 2020.
• Stream more than 25 4K HD videos simultaneously
• Download an HD movie in less than 60 seconds
This scholarship is designed to recognize outstanding teens who have demonstrated a commitment to the
• Download 100 songs in three seconds
community through volunteer participation as a LARCS Ranch Hand Volunteer and/or Teen Leadership
• Upload about 1,000 photos in about a minute
Council. The number of scholarships awarded and the amount of per scholarship may vary based on the
number of qualified applicants on annual basis. Cox is now offering GIGABLAST internet service to 100% percent of residential customers in Orange County.
For more information, visit LaderaLife.com. “Our entire household runs on a fast internet connection,” said Wade Chapman, a Ladera Ranch resident with Cox high speed internet service.
“Whether it’s for work, school or entertainment, it all requires a strong wifi connection.”
Students enrolling at Saddleback College may apply for the LARCS Scholarship directly through
Cox has committed to investing $10 billion in its network nationally over the next five years, and the significant upgrades to its infrastructure
Saddleback College to help support their educational and career aspirations at https://www.saddlebackcollege.edu
in Ladera Ranch are part of that commitment.
“By heavily investing in our infrastructure, we are enabling smart homes, smart businesses and smart cities that
are more connected than ever before,” said Sam Attisha, Senior Vice President and Region Manager for Cox Com-
munications in California. ◘
16 WINTER 2019 | LADERALIFE.COM WINTER 2018 | LADERALIFE.COM 17

TOYS FOR TROOP S TOY DRIVE BENEFITING
Thank you for
By C. Todd Stearns Ladera Ranch MARINES AND THEIR FAMILIES
By Joe Brenneman,
Supporting President
Chair
Ladera Rancho is Growing Up
Ladera Ranch Civic Council Ladera Ranch is participating in the Toys for Troops toy drive. Donations of new toys or gift cards
Local Businesses Chamber of Commerce
will be given to children (ages 0 to 18) of deployed Marines at Camp Pendleton and Miramar Air
Force Base. Please consider making a donation.
2019 was a great year in Ladera As Ladera leaves its teen years as
Ranch. Let’s recap what a community and enters a mature Collection Sites:
businesses opened or are in phase, it’s a good time to reflect on Ladera Ranch Clubhouses (November 4 through December 7):
the process: Grit Cycle, Xclusive
how we much we’ve learned and
who we are going to be when we LARMAC office at Avendale Village Clubhouse (Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m.
Taqueria, Row House, Poke
‘grow up’! As we move into our 20’s, & Saturday 9:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.)
Bowlz, Yoga Six, EOS Fitness,
there is much to be done and there
Stater Bros… and there’s more!
are plenty of big decisions that lie LARCS office at Oak Knoll Village Clubhouse offices (Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.)
We expect the property manager
ahead for us as a community. The
to sign a major restaurant to Ladera Ranch Civic Council has Events:
occupy the former Beach Fire been hard at work this past year to Santa Visits (December 6, 4:00 - 8:00 p.m. at the Covenant Hills Village Clubhouse)
Grill location and another popular ensure our continued success and Miracle on Mercantile Way and Tree Lighting (December 7, 1:00 - 5:00 p.m.)
concept in the former Cinnamon Productions. Positive changes to prepare Ladera for a bright future.
are happening at the Terrace Shops too. Businesses:
The Civic Council represents the interest of Ladera residents • Barkate Orthodontics • Parker Dentistry
It's exciting to report that Bridgepark Plaza, Mercantile East and and serves as a liaison between our community and the Orange • Canopy Alley • Lola’s Cafe
the Terrace Shops are all near full occupancy! In support of the County governing boards. As a result, we spend considerable • Gators Swim Club at Avendale • Nekter
time in meetings and conversations with our elected • Good Indeed • The Goddard School
work that still remains to be done in Mercantile West, the Chamber
representatives and their staff to ensure that Ladera Ranch is not
started Ranch Night Market - the farmer’s market re-imagined -
forgotten when considering items that affect our residents. If your business is interested in participating in the toy drive, please contact
and we want to say ‘thank you’ for making the Night Market a huge
We also stay connected to Capistrano Unified School District Melissa Sorenson at (949) 244-3992. ◘
success. through board meetings, roundtable discussions and meetings
with the Superintendent.
Each market drew approximately 2,000 people to Mercantile
West who would otherwise not have visited. That’s been good Traffic and public safety are areas of high concern and we have
for the surrounding businesses and in providing visibility for the made great strides in the past year to improve the quality of CHANGING LIVES BY RECYCLING
storefronts that still need quality operators. Your feedback has our roads, enhance signage and ensure safety. To that end, the
Council partnered with the Ladera Rancho Chamber to launch
been valuable and you have been clear on the types of businesses CLOTHES, HOME DÉCOR AND
the S.L.O.W. campaign to increase awareness and encourage
you want to see there, namely, food and beverage vendors. We’ve
residents to make a pledge to Stop, Look, Obey and Wave! Please
had a great time shaping the market into an event that you and ELECTRONICS
visit our website to find our more and sign the pledge.
your families want to visit. Its been fun!
We continue to partner closely with the Orange County Sheriff’s
We have terrific businesses here and we encourage you to make Department and CHP to monitor our safety and work with OC oodwill of Orange County is in the business
them your first choice for food, groceries, haircuts, banking, Public Works to make sure needed improvements are made. of helping people who are facing barriers
workouts, and more. The more revenue you circulate through our Gto get and keep jobs, which provides them
local economy, it ensures that businesses stay and thrive, and There is so much more to share, but not nearly enough space. We purpose, pride and dignity. We believe the
that we attract new businesses. Resident support is the number also partner with LARMAC, LARCS, Rancho Mission Viejo, Westar power of work changes lives. Through our retail
one factor that contributes to a business’ success - not rent. and other organizations to help Ladera as we continue to grow operations, shopgoodwill.com, and an array of
Please do your part to support our business community. ◘ up! life-changing programs and services, we help
individuals and the local community to thrive.
Won’t you join us? Please visit our website for more information.
Better yet, come to one of our Public Meetings. We would
Goodwill is much more than a store. Through
welcome your input and involvement.
our key programs, including job placement
Let me know your thoughts. You may reach me at jbrenneman@ and supported employment services, we have
lrciviccouncil.org or council@lrciviccouncl.org. Learn more at helped change more than 27,000 lives in the last
LRCivicCouncil.org. ◘ year.
For more than 90 years, Goodwill of Orange
County stores have used revenue from reselling
donated goods to fund programs and services Please consider donating to the Ladera Ranch Goodwill site. Donate your
that help local people, including many veterans gently-used clothing, home décor, electronics and more. This collection event
and individuals with disabilities, find a pathway will help those with barriers to employment become a productive participant in
to independence. society. ◘
The money raised from reselling the goods
Dates: Open 7 days a week through Sunday, January 26
Ranch Night Market collected at the Ladera Ranch Go Green event Location: Terramor Aquatic Park, 26281 O’Neill Drive,
has made a significant impact on our ability
Hours: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. (Closed for lunch from 11:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m.)
to connect unemployed individuals with jobs,
Photo (l-r): Ladera Ranch Civic Council: Rosemary Scott, Ed Gow, Stephanie Ramsey, helping them advance their careers and achieve Closed: Closed Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year’s Day
Joe Brenneman, Chenin Boutwell, and Heather Redd
their personal and professional goals.
18 WINTER 2019 | LADERALIFE.COM WINTER 2019 | LADERALIFE.COM 19

COMMUNITY PARTNERS
Supporting the Ladera Ranch Community
gnitnirP
laCoS
yb
detnirp
enizagaM
sgniW
dna
stooR
9102
retniW/5410#
SCRAL
PRESORTED
STANDARD
U.S. POSTAGE
PAID
SANTA ANA, CA
Ladera Ranch Community Services PERMIT NO. 4554
Oak Knoll Village Clubhouse
28192 O’Neill Drive
Ladera Ranch, CA 92694
2019
EMERALD GOLD
(cid:31)(cid:30)(cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:24)
SILVER BRONZE
Custom website
development and
digital marketing
NON-PROFIT & CHARITY PARTNERS
FRIENDS OF THE LADERA RANCH LIBRARY • GOODWILL INDUSTRIES OF ORANGE COUNTY • JAMES HENRY RANSOM FOUNDATION
LADERA RANCH CIVIC COUNCIL • LADERA RANCH RELAY FOR LIFE • LADERA RANCHO CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
LAURA'S HOUSE •1ST LAR MARINE BATTALION
