   
 
             
    
  
   
       
             
         
           
          
               
           
         
           
             
     
          
              
         
          
           
              
               
           
             
           
           
          
      
           
             
         
          
         
              
               
             
           
      
              
           
               
                   
          
                 
                  
                    
                          
State of Call: ornis, 
OFFICE OF STATE VETERINARIAN. 
Sacramento. 
PROCLAMATION . 
EXECUTIVE DEPARTICEET, 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA. 
Sacramento, cal., March 7, 1912. 
WHEREAS, The State Veterinarian of the State of california 
has ascertained that cattle located in certain counties and 
portions of counties in the State of california hereinafter nomied 
are liable to communicate an infectious disease known as Texas, 
splenetic or southern fever to cattle located in other counties 
and portions of counties in the State of california should said 
cattle located in the counties an: portions of counties herein- 
after named be shipped, moved, transported, driven or grazed over 
the lands situated i. other counties and portions of counties in 
the State of california; and, 
WHEREAS, Under and by virtue of an Act of the Legis- 
lature of the State of california, entitled, "An Act to protect 
domestic live stock from contagious and infectious diseases, to 
provide for the appointment and duties of officials to carry 
into effect the provisions of this Act, and to provide an appro- 
priation therefor", which became a law ..aron is, 1899, and as 
amended march 20, 1905, anu maron 23, 1907, and as further amended 
and approved march 19, 1909, the State Veterinarian of the State 
of california, in order to prevent the spreading or communication 
of said disease of Texas, splendtic or southern fever in cattle 
has, on this seventh day of March 1019, quarantined the following 
counties and portions of counties in the State of california; 
The entire county of San Diego. 
All that part of Crange county located south and west of 
a line beginning at the Pacific ocean in the town of New Fort 
beaca; thence northeasterly following the center of the _. ew 
rort- Tustin Road to its intersection with the santa Ana-Trabuco 
Road; trience Southeasterly following the center of said Santa 
ana- Trabuco Road to its intersection with the Aliso Canyon houd; 
thence northeasterly following the center of said Aliso Canyon 
Road to the north line of town ship 6 south, range 6 west; thence 
east on said township line to its intersection with the eastern 
boundary line of orange county. 
All that part of San Luis Obispo County lying west and 
south of a line commencing at the point of the intersection of 
the township line between township 32 9., R. 17 ... and 32 3., R. 
18 2., and the Santa Maria River on the southern boundary of the 
county of San Luis Obispo, and extending northerly on said town- 
ship line between townships 32 5 R. 17 2. , 32 5., n. 18. E. and 
31 3., R. 17 and ol s., at. le to its intersection with 
the summit of the Santa Lucia range of mountains; thence follow- 
ing the summit of the Santa Lucia range, o 
and northwesterly to its intersection with the Morelleffy usaha- 
        
          
           
             
           
         
          
          
              
              
          
             
          
                     
                 
           
                  
        
             
                  
              
       
         
               
                 
              
           
           
         
             
                   
     
          
       
         
                
         
         
            
             
             
              
             
 
           
           
            
                                      
            
          
           
                             
          
          
           
          
            
            
          
ary line of San Luis Obispo County. 
The State Veterinarian has, on this seventh day 
of march 1912, made and established the following rules and 
regulations as to the movements of cattle from said quarantined 
counties and quarantined portions of counties into other counties 
or portions of counties in the state of california; 
From and after this 7th day of March 1912, every 
person, company, corpo. ation, their agents and servants, are 
hereby pronibited from driving, leading, moving, carrying or trans- 
porting, or from causing or permitting to be driven, dec, moved, 
transported, carried or arifted into any other county of portion 
of county in the State of california, any cattle originating or 
being in the amoresaid quarantined counties and portions of quaran- 
tined counties, unless suon cattle nave first been inspected by 
the State Veterinarian or his duly authorized deputy and are 
accompanied by a certificate issued by such officer stating that 
said cattle are free iron contagious ana infectious diseases and 
cattle ticks (Margaropus annulatus) ; provide. , however, that when 
said cattle are shipped or transported on railroad trains for 
imme fate slaughter inspection and certification of such cattle 
will not be required, but that whenl so sapped or transported by 
railroad the following regulations must be observed: 
On unloading said cattle at their destination, or for 
food and rest en route to some, separate pens must be set apart 
to receive them an. no other cattle shall be achatted to said pens. 
The cars that have carried said cattle shall be cleaned ard als- 
infected before they are again used wo transport, store or shelter 
animals or merchandise. 
All curs carrying said cattle shall bear placards 
stating that seid cars contain "SOUTHLI CATTI", and each of the 
way bills of seid shipments snell have a note on its lace with a 
similar statement. 
The cars used to transport such cattle smell of cleaned 
and disinfected in the following manner; 
(a) Remove all litter and manure. This little and 
manure must be stored Where no cattle can come into contact with 
it for a period of at least six months. 
Wash the cars with water until clear. 
Saturate the entire inner surface of the curs, in- 
cluding the inner surface of the car doors, with a mixture made of 
one and one half pounds of lime and one quarter pound of pure 
carcolic acid to each gallor of water; or with & solution made 
by dissolving four ounces of chloride of lime to each gallon of 
water. 
It is further ordered that & violation of any or either 
of the foregoing rules and regulations shell ce an offense, and 
punishable as provided by the laws of the State of California. 
NOW, THEREFORE, I, KIRAL W. JOHNSON, as Covernor of the 
State of California, by virtue of the authority vested in he oy 
law, do hereby proclaim the counties and portions of counties 
named in this proclamation quarantined within the state of 
California, and further herecy proclaim the foregoing rules and 
regulations prescribed by the State Veterinarian for the main- 
tonance and enforcement of such quarantine to we legal and oind- 
ing rules and regulations within the State of Callfor la, and I 
do further proclaim that said rules and regulations shall be 
maintained and enforced within the State of California, and that 
5 violation thereof shall subject all persons so violating any of 
said rules and regulations to the penalties provided for in 
            
           
         
          
           
           
               
        
      
 
  
section eight of that said Act of the Legislature of the State 
of California entitled, "An Act to protect domestic live stock 
from contagious and infectious diseases, to provide for the 
appointment and duties of officials to carry into effect the 
provisions of this Act, and to provide an appropriation therefor." 
In Witness Whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and 
caused the Great Seal of this State to be hereunto affixed, this 
seventh day of March A. D. , 1912. 
Governor of the State of California. 
Attest: 
Secretary of State. 