 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Historic, archived document 
  
Do not assume content reflects current 
scientific knowledge, policies, or practices. 
 
FARMEßS'BULLETIN 1057 UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OE AöRICULTURE 
CATTLE- FEVER MÜ #•*• 
TICKS andMETHODS of ERADICATION 
EVEClY-DfPP ING VAT   IS 
A rAMAi in Pon^PFDirv 
THE ERADICATION of the cattle tick from the 
Southern States is a problem of prime impor- 
tance to the agricultural welfare of the entire 
country. 
The elimination of the tick will give a very great 
impetus to the cattle and dairy interests, especially 
of the South, where agriculture will be placed on a 
more scientific and profitable basis. 
Although the eradication of the tick will be of 
greatest advantage to the States in which ticks are 
found, the benefits will be enjoyed also by all other 
sections. In consequence the problem, in large 
measure, is one of national importance. 
A number of publications on the cattle tick, its 
habits, and methods of eradication have been issued 
by the United States Department of Agriculture and 
by various investigators in the Southern States. 
This bulletin, prepared for the use of farmers, stock- 
men, and other interested persons, brings together, 
from the various sources, practical and useful infor- 
mation regarding the tick and its eradication. It 
supersedes Bureau of Animal Industry Circular 207 
and Farmers' Bulletins 498 and 603, which are no 
longer available for distribution. 
Contribution from the Bureau of Animal Industry 
JOHN R. MOHLER, Chief 
Washington, D. C. October, 1919 
GATTLE-FEVER TICKS AND METHODS OF 
ERADICATION. 
W. P. EIXENBEEGEB and ROBEBT M. CHAPíN, Bureau of Animal Industry.1 
CONTENTS. 
Page. 
Progress in tick eradication  3 
Reasons   for   eradicating   the   cattle 
tick  4 
Life history of the tick  6 
Development on the ground  6 
Development on cattle  11 
Summary of life history  11 
Methods of eradication  11 
Dipping___  12 
Pasture rotation  17 
Page. 
Arsenical   dips  21 
Properties of substances used in 
making arsenical dips  21 
General composition of dips  23 
Making the S-B dip  24 
Making the boiled dip  26 
Diluting the dip to form a bath- 27 
Replenishing the  bath and cor- 
recting its strength  29 
Precautions in the use of arsenic 
and arsenical dips  31 
PROGRESS IN TICK ERADICATION. 
THE Bureau of Animal Industry, in cooperation with the State 
authorities, is conducting tick-eradication work in the region 
infested by the cattle tick, as shown in the map (figure 1). From 
1906, when this cooperative work was first undertaken, to December 
1, 1918, a total of 458,529 square miles was released from Federal 
quarantine which had been established to control the situation, and in 
considerable additional area the work is well under way. The terri- 
tory already released from quarantine exceeds the combined areas of 
the following block of States : Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee, North 
Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Arkansas, 
and Louisiana. This record alone should be ample proof of the feasi- 
bility of eradicating the tick from the entire infested area, and is 
evidence of the effectiveness of the methods adopted. 
The methods of eradication have been improved upon from time 
to time as new facts became known, and it may be stated that the 
methods have reached such a degree of perfection and have had 
such a wide, practical test, that the question of how to eradicate ticks 
is no longer an essential part of the problem. The main part of the 
task is to secure hearty, vigorous, and conscientious cooperation of 
the people. In other words, the work will progress just as rapidly 
as the people desire that it shall. 
1 AUTHOR'S NOTE.—Much of the Information in this bulletin relating to the life history 
of the tick and methods of eradication has been taken almost verbatim from Farmers' 
Bulletin 498, by H. W. Graybill, with slight revisions by B. H. Ransom, chief of the 
Zoological Division of the bureau. Robert M. Chapin, of the Biochemie Division, pre- 
pared that portion of the bulletin relating to arsenical dips. 
3 
4 Farmers9 Bulletin 1057. 
REASONS FOR ERADICATING THE CATTLE TICK. 
Various kinds or species of ticks occur on cattle in the Southern 
States, but the one that chiefly concerns us here is that commonly 
called the "cattle" or " Texas-fever " tick (Margaropus annulatus). 
It is the one most frequently found on cattle in the South and is 
much more abundant than any of the other species. When the losses 
caused by this parasite are once thoroughly understood by farmers 
and stockmen arguments in favor of tick eradication will not be 
needed. Some of the losses are not directly noticeable and conse- 
quently make little impression, while others properly chargeable to 
the tick are frequently attributed to other causes. 
It is hardly necessary to emphasize that the tick is something more 
than a simple parasite drawing blood from its " host," the name com- 
monly given the animal on which a parasite lives. The tick is also 
the carrier of a dangerous microorganism, or germ, which it trans- 
mits to the blood of cattle, thus causing a disease known by many 
names, among which are Texas fever, tick fever, splenetic fever, and 
murrain.1 Without the tick there can be no tick fever, and by stop- 
ping the spread of the tick beyond its natural bounds the fever has 
been prevented from waging destruction among northern cattle, 
which are especially susceptible to the disease. In order to restrict 
the distribution of the tick the National and State Governments 
maintain quarantine areas, marking the boundaries between the 
States or portions of States harboring the pest and those that do not 
(see figure 1). Cattle may be moved out of the quarantined areas 
only in accordance with the regulations of the Secretary of Agricul- 
ture to prevent the spread of splenetic fever of cattle. 
The Bureau of Animal Industry has received hundreds of letters 
from farmers and other interested persons, all residents of the south- 
ern territory which has been freed from ticks, testifying to the bene- 
fits derived from the destruction of the pest. The consensus of 
opinion in these letters indicates that on the average cattle are en- 
hanced in value about $10 a head, they weigh one-fifth more, they 
grade one-fourth better, and they are safe from tick fever and from 
the shrinkage which it causes. It is also stated that the cattle indus- 
try in the South is increasing, that there is an increase in improved 
blood, that the milk yield of cows is increased about one-fourth, and 
that there is an increase of forage crops and silos. 
The South needs more and better live stock and a larger and better 
dairy industry, and these objects are being promoted greatly by the 
destruction of the tick. More than that, the increased production of 
live stock, by reason of its important influence in maintaining and 
1 For information on this disease and how it iâ transmitted by ticks, see Farmers' Bul- 
letin 569, " Texas or Tick Fever." 
Cattle-Fever Ticks. 
6 Farmers9 Êulletin 1057. 
improving soil fertility, is of distinct benefit in increasing the yield 
of field crops. An incidental though important advantage of stock 
raising and dairying will be found in the distribution of the farmer's 
income throughout the year, enabling him to live on a cash basis. 
Thus the benefits that will accrue to southern agriculture through 
exterminating the cattle tick will be far-reaching. 
LIFE HISTORY OF THE TICK. 
To carry out methods of eradication successfully it is necessary to 
know the life history of the tick and the influence of temperature, 
moisture, and other climatic conditions on the various stages of its 
existence. In following the discussion of these matters, the reader 
is asked to bear in mind that whenever the term " tick " or " cattle 
tick " or " fever tick " is used it refers to the one species or kind, 
Margaropm cmmdatus.1 The fever tick is sometimes confused with 
a number of other ticks occasionally found on cattle which, so far 
as concerns the transmission of Texas fever, are entirely harmless 
to them. Some of these ticks are illustrated in figures 2 and 3, which 
will help the reader to distinguish between the various kinds. 
Cattle are the usual hosts for the fever tick. Frequently, horses, 
mules, deer, and sometimes even buffaloes and sheep serve as hosts. 
But none of the latter animals, with the possible exception of deer 
and buffaloes, are susceptible to tick fever; consequently they suffer 
from the tick as a simple parasite and not as a transmitter of dis- 
ease. So far as deer and animals other than cattle, horses, and mules 
are concerned no consideration need be given them in practical tick 
eradication. In the case of horses and mules, however, it is often 
necessary to treat them the same as cattle. 
The tick spends only a part of its life on the body of the animal ; 
the rest of the development occurs on the pasture. 
DEVELOPMENT ON THE GROUND. 
In tracing the life history of the cattle tick it is convenient to be- 
gin with the large, plump, olive-green engorged female tick (figure 
4), about half an inch in length, attached to the skin of a cow. Dur- 
ing the few preceding days she has increased enormously in size, 
as a consequence of drawing a large supply of blood. 
When fully engorged she drops to the ground and at once, espe- 
cially if the weather is warm, begins to search for a hiding place 
on moist earth beneath leaves or any other litter which may serve 
1 The reader desiring fuller information on the life history of the cattle tick is referred 
to Bulletin 72, of the Bureau of Entomology, and Bulletin 130, Bureau of Animal Indus- 
try, U. S. Department of Agriculture, which may be obtained from the Superintendent of 
Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington, D. C, for 15 and 10 cents, respec- 
tively. 
Cattle-Fever Ticks. 7 
as a protection from the sun and numerous enemies or shield her 
from unfavorable conditions. The female tick may be devoured by 
birds, or destroyed by ants, or may perish as the result of low tem- 
perature, absence or excess of moisture, and many other unfavorable 
conditions ; so that many which fall to the ground die before they lay 
eggs. 
During the spring, summer, and fall months egg laying begins 
in from 2 to 20 days, and during the winter months in from 13 to 
98 days, after the female tick has fallen to thé ground. The eggs 
are small, elliptical-shaped, at first of a light-amber color, later 
changing to a dark brown, and are about one-fiftieth of an inch in 
length. As the eggs are laid they are coated with a sticky secretion, 
which causes them to adhere in clusters and no doubt keeps them 
from drying out. During egg laying the body of the mother tick 
gradually shrinks, and finally is reduced to about one-third or one- 
fourth its original size. Egg laying is greatly influenced by tem- 
perature, being retarded or even arrested by cold weather. In the 
summer time egg laying may be completed as soon as 4 days after it 
has begun, or by the end of about a week after the tick has dropped 
to the ground. It has been observed that if the ticks drop in the fall 
of the year the egg-laying process may continue for as long as 151 
days. A tick may deposit from a few hundred to more than 5,000 
eggs, and when egg laying is completed the mother tick, having ful- 
filled her purpose, dies in a few days. 
After the eggs have beeji laid they must undergo a period of in- 
cubation before they are ready to hatch. The period may be as short 
as 19 days in the summer, or as long as 200 days if the fall and 
winter seasons are involved. When incubation has been completed 
there issues from each egg a small, oval, six-legged larva or seed tick, 
at first amber-colored, later changing to a rich brown. After crawl- 
ing slowly over and about the shell from which it has emerged, it 
usually remains more or less quiet for several days, after which it 
shows great activity, especially if the weather is warm, and ascends 
the nearest vegetation, such as grass, herbs, and even shrubs. 
Since each female lays an enormous mass of eggs at one spot, thou- 
sands of larvae may appear in the course of time at the same place. 
The young ticks will ascend the near-by vegetation and collect on 
the leaves and other parts of plants. This instinct of the seed ticks 
to climb upward is a very important adaptation to increase their 
chances of reaching a host. If the vegetation on which they rest is 
disturbed they become very active and extend their long front legs 
upward in a divergent position, waving them violently in an attempt 
to seize hold of a host. 
During its life on the pasture the seed tick takes no food and con- 
sequently does not increase in size, and unless it reaches a host on 
FIG. 2.—Various ticks that infest cattle. 1. Mature female cattle tick, enlarged ; la, same 
natural size; 16, head and shield of same, magnified 15 times. 2, Mature female castor- 
bean tick, enlarged ; 2a, same, natural size ; 2b, head and shield of same, magnified 15 
times. ¿. Mature female net tick, enlarged ; 3«, same, natural size ; 36, head and shield 
of same, magnified 15 times. 4. Mature female dog or wood tick, enlarged ; 4«, same 
natural size; 46, head and shield of same, magnified 15 times. 
8 
FIG. 3.—Various ticks that infost cattle. 5. Mature female Lone Star tick, enlarged ; 
5a, same, natural size ; 56, head and shield of same, magnified 15 times. 6. Mature 
female ear tick, enlarged ; 6a. same, natural size ; Ö6, head of same protruding from 
beneath, magnified 15 times. 7. Mature female chicken tick, enlarged ; 7«, same, natu- 
ral size ; 71), upper portion of same, head invisible, magnified 10 times. 8. Mature fe- 
male European dog tick, enlarged ; 8a, same, natural size ; 86, head and shield of same, 
magnified 15 times. 
122543°—19- 9 
10 Farmers' Bulletin 1057. 
which to live as a parasite, it dies of starvation. The endurance of 
seed ticks is very great, however, as they have been found to live 
more than 8 months during the colder part of the year. For example, 
it is known that in the case of female ticks that dropped to the 
ground August 14 and deposited eggs that began to hatch September 
SEED TICKS 
I NVMPH 
♦ ADULT MALE YOUNG ADULT FEMALE 
ENGORGED ADULT FEMALE FEMALE LAYING EGGS 
FIG. 4.—Texas-fever ticks, magnified 5 times. 
9, all the seed ticks from the eggs were not dead until the following 
May 13, 246 days after hatching began, or 274 days after the females 
dropped from the cattle. Fortunately, however, seed ticks are not 
able to live nearly so long during warm weather and die within a few 
months in the summer. 
Cattle-Fever Ticks. 11 
DEVELOPMENT ON CATTLE. 
The parasitic part of a tick's life begins when the larva or seed 
tick reaches a favorable host, such as a cow. The tick crawls up 
over the hair and commonly attaches itself to the skin of the es- 
cutcheon, the inside of the thighs and flanks, or to the dewlap. 
It begins at once to draw blood and soon increases in size. In a few 
days the young tick changes from a brown color to white, and in 
from 5 to 12 days molts or sheds its skin. The new form has 8 
legs instead of 6 and is known as a nymph. 
In from 5 to 11 days after the first molt the tick again sheds its 
skin and becomes sexually mature. At this stage for the first time, 
males and females can be distinguished with certainty. The male 
emerges from his skin as a brown, oval tick, about one-tenth of an 
inch long. He has reached his growth and goes through no further 
development, but later he shows great activity, moving about over 
the skin of the host. The female at the time of molting is slightly 
larger than the male. She never shows much activity, seldom mov- 
ing far from her original point of attachment. She still has to un- 
dergo most of her growth. After mating, the female increases very 
rapidly in size and has been known to become fully engorged as 
early as 48 hours after the second molt, but usually at least 4 days 
are required for her engorgement. Commonly this period lasts from 
about a week to as long as 25 days. In exceptional cases, the time 
that elapses between the attachment of the tick as a seed tick and 
its dropping from the animal as a fully engorged female may be 
less than 20 days, but generally it is 3 weeks or a little more. 
The greatest length of time that a tick has been observed to stay 
on an animal is 66 days. 
SUMMARY OF LIFE HISTORY. 
To sum up, on the pasture there are three stages of the tick—the 
engorged female, the egg, and the larva or seed tick; and on the 
host animal are also three stages—the larva or seed tick, the nymph, 
the sexually mature adult of both sexes, and in addition the engorged 
condition of the female. 
METHODS OF ERADICATION. 
In undertaking measures for eradicating the tick it is evident 
that the pest may be attacked in two locations, namely, the pas- 
ture and the cattle. Animals may be freed of ticks in two ways. 
They may be treated with a disinfectant that will destroy ßll the 
ticks present, or they may be pastured at proper intervals on tick- 
free fields until all the ticks have dropped. The method of freeing 
cattle from ticks by applying a solution that kills the ticks is the 
12 Farmers' Bulletin 1057. 
method generally used. The pasture-rotation method is not only 
more complicated but the necessary tick-free fields are seldom avail- 
able. 
In freeing pastures the method followed may be either direct or 
indirect. The direct method consists in excluding all cattle, horses, 
and mules from pastures until all the ticks have died from starva- 
tion. This plan is seldom followed because the owner is usually not 
willing to give up the use of his pasture even temporarily. The in- 
direct plan consists in permitting the cattle and other animals to 
continue on the infested pasture and treating them at regular inter- 
vals with agents destructive to ticks, thus preventing engorged 
females from dropping and reinfesting the pasture. All the seed 
ticks on the pasture, or those which hatch from eggs laid by females 
already there, will die eventually. Those that get on the cattle from 
time to time will be destroyed by the treatment, while those which 
fail to find a host will starve to death in the pasture. 
DIPPING. 
Ticks upon cattle may be destroyed by using a tick-destroying 
agent, such as arsenic. The dipping vat is the best and cheapest 
means of applying the remedy. The great advantage of dipping 
over spraying and applying remedies by hand lies in the fact that 
thoroughness of the treatment is practically assured. 
PROCEDURE IN DIPPING. 
When eradication is undertaken, all the cattle, and also the horses 
and mules if they harbor ticks, are treated regularly every two 
weeks during the part of the year that the temperature is favorable 
to treatment, until the ticks have disappeared. The purpose of the 
treatment is to destroy all ticks that get on the animals before they 
have had a chance to mature and drop, thus preventing them from 
reinfesting the pasture, farm, or range. If the treatment used were 
absolutely effective in destroying each and every tick on the animals 
treated there would be no renewal of the infestation after the treat- 
ment is begun. The cattle would act simply as collectors of ticks 
which would be destroyed regularly by the treatment applied every 
two weeks. It is probable, however, that in most instances, either be- 
cause of the lack of efficiency of the dip or imperfect application, or 
because of failure to dip all cattle systematically, some ticks escape 
treatment and reproduce, thus prolonging the time that otherwise 
would be required for eradication. 
If ticks apparently disappear from the cattle after they have been 
under treatment for some time, the dipping should not be discon- 
tinued until a number of careful inspections show that the cattle are 
Cattle-Fever Ticks. 13 
free of ticks. If ticks continue on cattle until cold weather and then 
finally disappear it should be borne in mind that in all probability 
eradication has not been accomplished and that there may be en- 
gorged females, unhatched eggs, and inactive seed ticks on the farm 
or range, and that even if the cattle should remain free of ticks dur: 
ing the winter they may become reinfested the following spring. In 
any case in which ticks disappear from the cattle and treatment is 
discontinued, the cattle should be watched very carefully for ticks 
until ample time has elapsed to leave no doubt that eradication has 
been accomplished. 
As a general rule it has been found that if dipping is begun in 
March and systematically and thoroughly done, all cattle being 
dipped every 14 days until November, complete eradication will be se- 
cured.   In dipping, each animal should be completely covered by the 
¿ dip.   To prevent any animals from going through the vat without be- 
Pf coming wet all over, a man, provided with a forked stick, should be 
stationed at the middle of the vat to shove under those that have not 
been completely submerged. 
Dipping is the only really satisfactory method of treating animals 
for ticks. In cases of emergency, however, or where there are not 
cattle enough within a radius of several miles to warrant the con- 
struction of a vat in which all the cattle of the community may be 
dipped, spraying may be advisable. In spraying animals the work 
should be done with great thoroughness and every portion of the 
body treated. An animal can not be sprayed properly unless it is 
tied or otherwise held, nor can good results be obtained unless the 
hair and skin are thoroughly wetted. 
RULE FOR CALCULATING THE CAPACITY OF A VAT. 
The capacity of the vat is obtained usually in the following manner : 
Multiply the average length by the average width in inches, then 
multiply the product by the depth; this will give the approximate 
number of cubic inches of space to be filled with dip. Divide this by 
231 (the number of cubic inches in a gallon), and the result will be 
the number of gallons of dip required to charge the vat. 
To obtain the average length, add the length at the Bottom to the 
length at the top (that is, at the line to which the vat is to be filled), 
and divide the sum by 2. Obtain the average width in the same man- 
ner. The depth should be taken at the center of the vat, and should 
be from bottom to dip line only and not to the top of the vat. Like- 
wise, in determining the length and width, measure only the space to 
be filled with liquid and not above that line. Gauges or rods should be 
prepared and marked to show the number of gallons at various 
depths in the vat. 
14 Farmers9 Bulletin 1057. 
SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF A CONCRETE VAT. 
Site.—The site selected for the vat should be dry and of sufficient 
size to permit the construction of the chute, the dripping pen, and at 
least two additional pens—one for holding the cattle prior to dipping 
and the other for retaining them, after dipping, until sufficiently 
dried. 
Excavation.—The excavation should be made 1 foot wider and 1 
foot longer than the inside dimensions of the vat and should conform 
to its shape. The inside dimensions of the vat are shown on the 
drawings (figure 5) and are as follows: Length at top of vat, 26 
feet; bottom, 12 feet; width at top, 3 feet; at bottom, 1J feet; depth, 
7 feet. 
The sides and bottoms of the excavation should be firm and solid, 
as they are to serve for the outside forms in casting the concrete. If 
it is necessary to do any filling in order to conform to the shape of 
the vat, the- filling should be puddled and thoroughly rammed until 
solid.   The stability of the concrete depends on the foundation. 
Forms and fences.—The wooden forms should be constructed of 
1-inch boards and 2 by 4 inch braces, the boards being nailed to the 
outside face of the braces, as shown in the drawings. The sides and 
end walls should be built 8 inches higher than the surface of the 
ground, which should be level. Any suitable lumber may be used for 
the forms and fences.   Saplings may be used for posts. 
Concrete.—The concrete should be made of (by measure) 1 part of 
cement, 2| parts of sand, and 5 of broken rock or gravel. The cement 
should be of standard brand of Portland, the sand clean and coarse, 
and the broken rock from about |-inch pieces to those not larger than 
will pass in every direction through a 1-inch ring. A vat according 
to the plan (figure 5) will require about 40 sacks of cement, 5 yards 
of sand, and 10 yards of gravel. 
A 26-foot vat is used extensively for eradication purposes with 
satisfactory results. If it is desired, however, to lengthen the body 
of the vat on account of large numbers of cattle to be treated, the fol- 
lowing quantities of concrete material should be added for each lineal 
or running foot—cement, 1^ sacks; sand, 0.12 yard; stone, 0.24 yard. 
The sand is measured out first and the cement emptied on top, and 
the two materials thoroughly mixed, dry. In the meantime the stone 
may be measured out and thoroughly drenched with water. The 
cement-sand mixture is mixed with water and the resulting mortar 
then combined with the stone. The stone should be shoveled on the 
mortar, previously spread out in a thin layer. Mixing should con- 
tinue until the stone is thoroughly coated with mortar, more water 
being added during the mixing process if necessary. 
■fon M°  
FIG. 5. -Plan for construction of concrete vat. 
O Ö 
C71 
16 Farmers9 Bulletin 1057. 
Laying.—Before laying the concrete the molds should be set and 
thoroughly braced into place. The side forms may be suspended in 
the excavation with their lower edges 6 inches from the bottom. 
They are held in place by crosspieces nailed to the uprights and of 
sufficient length to rest on supports placed several feet from the edges 
of the excavation. The-concrete for the bottom and incline is de- 
posited first, the mixture being of a consistence that water will flush 
to the surface on ramming. The mixtures for the sides and end 
should be very wet and thoroughly puddled into place. The con- 
sistence of the concrete for the side walls should be such that it will 
run oñ the shovel unless handled quickly. 
The laying of the concrete should be done, if possible, in one 
operation, so there will be no joints between new .and old work. If 
it becomes necessary to do the concrete work on two or more days 
the surface to receive the new concrete should be washed clean and 
coated with a grout of pure Portland cement and water mixed to 
the consistence of cream. The new concrete should be placed before 
the grout has set. Extreme care must be taken to prevent dirt from 
falling on top of the fresh concrete. 
The forms should not be removed until the concrete is set, which 
in moderate weather takes place in about 24 hours. Wet down the 
concrete abouti twice in 24 hours until the forms are removed. In 
damp, cold weather at least 48 hours should be allowed before re- 
moving the forms. It is advisable, especially in water-soaked 
ground, to allow the forms to remain in place for one week before 
removal. 
Surfacing or ftnishing coat.—Dampen the walls before applying 
the finishing coat. Cover the entire inside surface of walls and 
floor with a coating of cement and sand, mixed half-and-half, and 
with water enough to make it " quaky." Place a small quantity of 
the mixture on a float ; beginning at the bottom of the wall as near 
the floor as possible, make one stroke upward ; take up another float 
of the cement-sand mixture, overlap the ending of the last float and 
make another upward stroke. Eepeat until walls are completed. 
Do not try to float the walls too smooth. Finish with cement and 
water mixed to thickness of cream and applied with a kalsomine or 
whitewash brush. 
Exit incline.^—The exit incline, as shown in the plans (figure 5), 
is not so steep as to require a cleated false bottom. The surface, 
however, should be finished very roughly to permit the animals to 
maintain a secure foothold. 
Slide.—The slide for dry or range cattle may be built only 2 feet 
long with a drop of 2 feet. For dairy cows, however, it is advisable 
to have a slide 4 feet long, that is, long enough for the cow to stand 
Cattle-Fever Ticks. 17 
on, with a drop of 2£ or 3 feet so that the arsenical bath will cover 
the edge of the slide at least a foot in depth. This kind of slide 
for dairy cows prevents bruising the udders. 
Slides should be finished very smooth by much floating of the 
concrete and finishing with a mixture of equal parts of cement and 
fine sand. 
Cover.—The vat should be so inclosed or covered as to keep chil- 
dren or small animals from entering or falling in. 
Dripping chute and chute leading to the vat.—The dripping chute, 
which is regarded as more satisfactory than a dripping pen, is built 
at the head of the exit incline in line with the vat. It should be 
about 30 inches wide. The length will depend on the number of 
cattle to be accommodated at one. time. From 4 to 5 feet are allowed 
for each animal, and a length of from 20 to 40 feet is considered a 
convenient size for small herds. The floor should be made of con- 
crete, at least 18 inches wide, sloping toward the vat so that the 
dripping from the cattle will flow back into the vat through the open- 
ing provided. The floor at the sides of the chute is raised about 2 
inches in the form of a curb to keep the dip from running off. 
The chute leading to the vat should be not more than 30 inches 
wide and 20 feet long and it is desirable to have the receiving pen 
and retaining chute large enough to accommodate the animals to be 
dipped. 
PASTURE ROTATION. 
TIME REQUIRED TO  KILL TICKS BY  STARVATION. 
The time necessary for ticks to die out on a pasture after removal 
of the cattle is of importance with reference not only to methods of 
eradication by rotation but to methods of eradication by dipping. 
When systematic dipping is begun and further infection of the pasture 
is stopped by killing all ticks that get on the cattle, the period during 
which the dipping must be continued in order to secure eradication 
is primarily dependent upon the length of life of the seed ticks 
already on the pasture and of those that hatch out from eggs laid by 
ticks that dropped before dipping was begun. 
The time required for the ticks to die out after all animals have 
been removed from infested fields and pastures varies considerably, 
depending principally on the climate and the weather. The dates 
when pastures will be free of ticks after all cattle have been removed 
are given in the following table: 
18 Farmers' Bulletin Î057. 
TABLE 1.—Time required to free pastures from ticks by starvation. 
BASED ON DATA OBTAINED AT DALLAS, TEX., AND AUBURN, ALA. 
Dato of removal of all animals from 
pasture. 
Julyl  
Aug.l  
Sept.l....  
Oct. 1 to Nov. 1, inclusive.. 
Dec.l  
Date 
when 
pasture 
will be 
free 
from 
ticks. 
Mar. 1 
May 1 
July 1 
Aug. 1 
Aug. 15 
Date of removal of all animals from 
pasture. 
Dec. 15 to Mar. 15, inclusive. 
Apr. 1   
Apr. 15  
May 1 to June 15, inclusive.. 
Date 
when 
pasture 
will be 
free 
from 
ticks. 
Sept. 1 
Sept. 15 
Oct. 15 
Nov.   1 
BASED ON DATA OBTAINED AT KNOXVILLE, TENN. 
Jan. 1  
Feb. 1 to Mar. 15. 
Apr. 1 to 15  
Mayl  
May 15 to June 1. 
Aug. 
Nov. 
Jan. 
Jan. 
Feb. 15 
June 15  
Julyl  
July 15  
Aug.l to 15  
Sept. 1 to Oct. 1. 
May 1 
June 15 
July 1 
July 15 
Sept. 15 
The first part of the table is based on investigations by Hunter 
- and Hooker1 at Dallas, Tex., and by Graybill at Auburn, Ala., under 
cooperation between the Bureau of Animal Industry and the veteri- 
nary department of the Alabama Polytechnic Institute.2 All the 
periods obtained by Newell and Dougherty (1906)3 in work carried on 
at Baton Rouge, La., which is much further south, are shorter. The 
periods given in the table should be found ample for all places 
no further north than Dallas, Tex., or Auburn, Ala. 
In general, moisture and cold prolong, while dryness and heat 
shorten, the duration of the period that ticks will live on a pasture. 
If some portions of the same pasture differ with regard to tem- 
perature and moisture, as frequently happens, some parts become 
free of ticks before others do. Other things being equal, high, dry, 
unshaded land becomes tick-free sooner than low, damp, shady land. 
Land, however, that is excessively moist and extremely shady, as 
along some river bottoms, is not likely to be a favorable breeding 
place for the cattle ticks, and lowlands subject to more or less regu- 
lar overflows, as a rule are only lightly infested, if at all. 
The time required for freeing pastures in the southern part of the 
infested area may be considerably less in many localities than that 
indicated in the first part of Table 1, yet the safest plan is to follow 
the table in most localities in the South. There is little doubt that 
in most regions in the northern half of the infested area the periods 
1 Bulletin 72, Bureau of Entomology, U. S. Department of Agriculture. 
2 Bulletin 130, Bureau of Animal Industry, U. S. Department of Agriculture. 
8 Circular 10, State Crop Pest Commission of Louisiana. 
Cattle-Fever Ticks. 19 
are longer. Cotton1 obtained at Knoxville, Tenn., during the years 
from 1907 to 1909, inclusive, the periods given in the lower part of 
Table 1. 
According to the experiments conducted by Cotton, the normal 
duration of an infestation may be considerably shortened or even 
suddenly brought to an end in infested pastures and fields by the 
occurrence of exceptionally cold weather. He found that a certain 
per cent of engorged females are destroyed by a temperature of 
23° F., that all engorged females are destroyed by a temperature of 
14° F. when not provided with a protective covering, and that ticks 
provided with a covering of dry chaff were able to survive a tem- 
perature of 12° F., but if the covering is wet they are killed as 
readily as when unprotected. It was found also that ticks that have 
deposited some eggs are much more readily destroyed than those 
that have not done so. In addition it was demonstrated that all 
unprotected eggs and all seed ticks are destroyed at temperatures 
of 49 F. and 2° F., respectively, but that eggs protected by dry litter 
can endure a much colder temperature. It is thus seen that the in- 
festation of fields may be greatly reduced during cold spells and, if 
the temperature falls to about zero, may be entirely destroyed. In 
case the temperature falls only to a point at which all the females 
are destroyed, the only result accomplished will be a shortening of 
the period of infestation. 
It would be well for stock owners, in eradicating ticks, to take 
advantage, so far as practicable, of all zero weather. It should be re- 
membered, however, that cattle even during the coldest weather are 
likely to harbor ticks which will be unaffected by the low tempera- 
ture. The ticks when they drop will reinfest the place ; consequently, 
when a spell of zero weather occurs, if the cattle are not on the fields, 
pastures, or ranges they should not be returned to them until freed 
of ticks. If on pasture they should be removed at once and not re- 
turned until made free of ticks by one of the methods suggested in 
this bulletin. 
TIME   REQUIRED   TO   FREE   CATTLE   OF  TICKS   ON   UNINFESÍED   FIELDS. 
Although the method is not often used, it is nevertheless possible 
to free cattle of ticks by placing them on a series of uninfested fields. 
This plan is based on the fact that the female tick must drop from 
the host to the ground before eggs can be laid and before young ticks 
will develop. 
The shortest time in which seed ticks appear after engorged females 
have been dropped is 20 days. Consequently, cattle placed on a tick- 
free field during the warmer part of the year are not in danger of 
1 Bulletin 94, Agricultural Experiment Station of the University of Tennessee. 
20 Farmers9 Bulletin 1057. 
becoming infested again with young ticks until 20 days have elapsed. 
The time required for all the ticks to drop after cattle have been 
placed on uninfested land varies with the temperature, being much 
longer in winter than in summer. Beginning at various times of the 
year, the time required is given in Table 2. 
TABLE 2.—Time required for all ticks to drop from cattle placed on tick-free land. 
When ticky cattle are placed on 
tick-free land during— 
August.... 
September 
October... 
November. 
January... 
February. 
All ticks will 
have dropped 
Six weeks. 
Do. 
Eight weeks. 
Nine weeks. 
Ten weeks. 
Seven weeks. 
When ticky cattle are placed on 
.   tick-free land danng— 
March 
April.. 
May... 
June.. 
July... 
All ticks will 
have dropped 
Sevsn weeks. 
Six weeks. 
Do. 
Do. 
Five weeks. 
Freeing cattle of ticks by rotation on tick-free land.—The plan of 
freeing cattle of ticks by changing them from one lot or field *to 
another is as follows : Beginning at any time of the year from March 
to September, inclusive, in the southern half of the infested area, the 
cattle are removed from the tick-infestod pasture they have been 
occupying to a tick-free lot or field and left there for not more than 
20 days. During that time a considerable number of ticks will drop. 
In order to prevent the cattle from becoming reinfested (by seed 
ticks resulting from eggs laid by females that have dropped), the 
herd is then changed to a second tick-free inclosure for 20 days 
longer, and if they are not free of ticks by that time, they are placed 
in a third tick-free inclosure for 20 days more. Should the two 
changes at intervals of 20 days have been made, 60 days will have 
elapsed, which, during the time of year indicated, is ample time for 
all ticks to have dropped, and the animals are ready to be placed on 
a tick-free pasture or field without danger of becoming reinfested. 
The periods to free cattle (given in the table above) are believed to 
be ample. It is a wise precaution, however, to examine the cattle 
carefully for ticks before placing them in the uninf ested field they 
are to occupy. 
From October to February, inclusive, the time required for seed 
ticks to appear after females have dropped is much longer than the 
time necessary for all the ticks to drop from cattle. Consequently, if 
it is desired, the herd may be left on the same field for the required 
length of time without danger of reinf estation. 
Table 3 gives the approximate dates when ticky cattle are in 
danger of reinf estation when placed on tick-free land at various 
times of the year. The first section applies to most localities in the 
southern half of the infested region, and the second section to 
localities having temperature conditions about the same as Knoxville, 
Tenn. 
Cattle-Fever Ticks. 21 
TABLE 8.—Date on which seed ticks will appear after ticky cattle have been 
placed on tick-free land. 
BASED ON  DATA OBTAINED  AT  BATON   BOUGE,   LA.,   AUBUBN,   ALA.,   AND DALLAS,  TEX. 
Date cattle placed on tick-free 
pastures. 
Jan. 1 to Feb. 4, inclusive.. 
Mar.3  
Apr. 15  
Mayl.  
JuneS  
Julyl  
Aug. 5  
Sept. 1  
Oct.l  
Nov. 1 to Dec. 15, inclusive. 
Date seed 
ticks will 
appear. 
Apr. 24 
May 3 
May 20 
June 5 
June 28 
July 25 
Aug. 30 
Oct. 7 
Feb. 25 
Mar.   3 
BASED   ON   DATA   OBTAINED   AT   KNOXVILLE,   TENN. 
Jan. 11 to Mar. 4, inclusive. 
Apr.l  
May 15  
June 12  
July3  
Aug. 6  
Sept. 4  
Oct. 2  
May 29 
June 3 
June 20 
July 19 
Aug. 2 
Sept. tf Apr. 
M^y 
14 
20 
ARSENICAL DIPS. 
PROPERTIES   OF  SUBSTANCES  USED  IN   MAKING  ARSENICAL   DIPS. 
The successful preparation of an arsenical dip calls for some 
knowledge of the properties of the raw materials. 
WHITE ARSENIC. 
White arsenic (arsenic trioxid, arsenious or arsenous oxid or add) 
must be purchased in the form of a fine powder and under a guaranty 
of 98 or 99 per cent purity. Water, even when boiling, dissolves it 
only slowly, but by the use of certain other chemicals it may readily 
and abundantly be brought into solution. 
One must never forget that white arsenic is a violent poison to 
man and animals. So are the concentrated dips prepared from it. 
The precautions necessary for safety will be discussed under a 
separate section, and any person who has anything whatever to do 
with arsenical dips is advised to read it often enough to keep the 
points fresh in mind. CAUSTIC SODA. 
Caustic soda (sodium Kydroœid), on account of its wide range of 
application by chemists, pharmacists, and manufacturing industries, 
occurs commercially in a number of different forms, as powder, 
sticks, solid masses, or broken fragments; in color it ranges from 
pure white to grayish or brownish tints. For the use of chemists and 
pharmacists it is put up in glass bottles; for industrial purposes it 
is supplied in various-sized cans or drums of thin sheet iron. The 
latter is the variety that should be purchased for making dip.   The 
22 Farmers9 Bulletin 1057. 
5 or 10-pound can is the best size to buy for home use ; larger con- 
sumers probably can handle the material in larger drums conven- 
iently and of course more economically. The purchaser must make 
sure that the contents of the drum he contemplates buying are in 
fragmentary form, for some caustic soda is run into drums in a 
melted condition and on cooling forms a single solid cake, which is 
not adapted for the present purpose. It always should be purchased 
under a guaranty of not less than 85 per cent actual caustic soda. 
Caustic soda is an intensely active and powerful substance. When 
exposed to the air it strongly attracts moisture, increasing in weight 
and becoming pasty, while at the same time it becomes contaminated 
with sodium carbonate through absorption of carbon dioxid. Hence 
it always must be purchased in original containers, never in bulk; 
the container must not be opened until just before the material is 
to be used; the substance must not be allowed to stand exposed to 
the air, and if any is left over which is to be kept for subsequent 
use it must be immediately transferred to a tin pail provided with a 
tight-fitting cover. 
Owing to the intense chemical activity of caustic soda it is ex- 
tremely corrosive in its effect upon skin or clothes, and upon the 
lungs if its dust is inhaled. Therefore it is necessary to handle it 
gently to avoid the raising of dust and to wash off at once with water 
any which may touch the skin or clothing. 
LYE. 
Lye designates à grade of caustic soda put up primarily for domes- 
tic use, such as making soap from waste grease and for general 
cleansing. It is sometimes of very inferior quality. If a guaranty 
regarding its purity can be obtained, it may be used for dip making, 
in case of necessity, in the same proportions as caustic soda. 
SODIUM  CARBONATE. 
Sodium carbonate is sold in a number of forms which differ 
greatly in strength, that is, in the proportion of actual sodium car- 
bonate they contain. Consequently the cheapest in cost per pound 
may not be the most economical to use. Soda ash is the strongest, but 
is not recommended for the home preparation of dips. It is of un- 
certain strength when purchased and becomes weaker on exposure to 
air, while in contact with water it lumps badly and dissolves slowly. 
Sal soda is the weakest and probably the least economical form, but 
because it is so well known and so easily obtained it has been the 
most generally used form of sodium carbonate for homemade dips. 
Its relative weakness is due to the fact that almost two-thirds of it 
is water, combined as " water of crystallization." When fresh it con- 
sists of large, nearly transparent crystals, but on exposure to air it 
tends to fall to a white powder. This change is simply due to the 
evaporation of the water of crystallization, and consequently the 
Cattle-Fever Ticks. 23 
material becomes stronger, almost approaching monohydrated sodium 
carbonate. This latter substance is a coarse, granular powder, con- 
taining only about one-seventh of its weight of water of crystalliza- 
tion, and is very little affected by exposure to air. Sesquicarbonate of 
soda is still another form which is stronger than sal soda, contain- 
ing less than one-third of its weight of substances not actual sodium 
carbonate.   It is likewise little affected by air. 
Both monohydrated carbonate and sesquicarbonate dissolve readily 
and can replace sal soda to excellent advantage provided their com- 
position is guaranteed by a reliable firm. In calculating formulas 
and costs it may be assumed that 10 pounds of sal soda can be re- 
placed by 4J pounds of the monohydrate or 5 pounds of the sesqui- 
carbonate. PINE TAR. 
Pine tar when fresh is semiliquid, but with age becomes granular 
and nearly solid, in which condition it is of less value. Mixed with 
it is usually more or less water of decidedly acid properties (pyro- 
ligneous acid), which on standing tends to float on the surface and 
should be dipped or poured off before the tar is used. 
Tar is heavier than water and when stirred with it usually forms 
a very poor mixture from which most of the tar rapidly settles out, 
but when the water is of just the right temperature and somewhat 
alkaline a fairly stable suspension generally may be obtained. When 
previously treated with caustic soda sufficient to combine with a con- 
siderable proportion of the tar acids, or when blended with soap, the 
tar easily mixes with water and then forms a good and permanent 
emulsion. THE GENERAL COMPOSITION OF DIPS. 
All arsenical cattle dips contain arsenious oxid as the active tick- 
killing agent. But since straight arsenious oxid—that is, white ar- 
senic—is so slowly soluble in water, some chemical agent such as 
sodium carbonate or hydroxid is necessary to bring it into solution. 
In this way the white arsenic is changed to sodium arsenite. If cer- 
tain manufacturing difficulties can be overcome it is possible that 
sodium arsenite of reliable composition may appear later on the 
market. Such a material could be dissolved directly in water and the 
trouble of making the compound from white arsenic and caustic soda 
would be avoided. 
But a plain water solution of sodium arsenite, however obtained, 
does not make an entirely satisfactory dip. Better results follow 
when pine tar is added. Possibly the pine tar increases the wetting 
or spreading power of the bath, which naturally results in better 
penetration and effectiveness against ticks and less risk of blistering 
cattle. It is probable that the pine tar also makes the sodium arsenite 
adhere better, so that it will less readily wash off in rain, or dust off 
in dry weather.   Perhaps it is distasteful to seed ticks so that they 
24 Farmers9 Bulletin 1057. 
are less liable to attach to cattle after dipping. Probably, too, cattle 
will be less inclined to drink the bath while going through the vat. 
Proprietary arsenical cattle dips appear now to have passed the 
experimental stage and to have become established as reliable and 
useful products. At any rate this can be said of the brands which 
have received permission for use in official dipping in place of the 
homemade dip. The formulas and standard samples of all such brands 
are in possession of the Bureau of Animal Industry and the manu- 
facturers are required to guarantee that their products as placed on 
the market will be kept up to standard and that all requirements of 
the bureau will be observed. Like the homemade dip they all contain 
sodium arsenite as the active tick-killing agent. They do not all 
contain pine tar, because that substance is difficult to blend into a 
highly concentrated product, but they all contain some other sub- 
stance or mixture of substances of such character and in such quantity 
as field trials have proved will produce the same effects. 
They are not regarded as any more effective or any milder on the 
cattle than properly prepared homemade dips. None the less they 
are undoubtedly safer for general use because they offer decidedly 
fewer opportunities for making mistakes in the quantities used or in 
the operations gone through and also fewer chances for accidental 
poisoning or other injury from the handling of powerful chemicals. 
Whether their higher cost is sufficiently outweighed by these con- 
siderations is necessarily a matter for individual decision. 
MAKING THE S-B DIP.1 
Homemade dips usually are made after the " S-B " formula. 
This calls for two stock solutions, arsenic stock and tar stock, 
which must not be mixed except in the diluted dipping bath. 
1 Abbreviated from " self-boiled," because sufficient heat to prepare the dip is generated 
by chemical action between the raw materials. The field men of the bureau do not agree 
on the best method of mixing. The truth is that several modifications give good results 
in the hands of experienced men and each man naturally prefers the one with which he 
is most familiar. The method of mixing here given is the original method published in 
Farmers' Bulletin 603, and, all things considered, appears to be somewhat the safest to 
recommend for general use, particularly to those who must depend entirely on printed 
instructions. But a modification devised by Dr. Harry Grafke, of the Bureau of Animal 
Industry, may be of interest. He says : " In a 5-gallon kettle or metal pail place the 10 
pounds white arsenic, then add one-half gallon of cold water in small quantities at a 
time, and stir with a broad paddle until all the arsenic is wet. Place the 4 pounds of 
caustic soda in a gallon pail, add one-half gallon of water, and stir until the caustic soda 
is practically all dissolved. Lean the top end of the broad paddle against the top of the 
kettle containing the arsenic and without delay begin adding the caustic-soda solution in 
small portions, allowing it to run down the surface of the broad paddle into the arsenic 
in such a way as to avoid splashing. If the solution begins to boil considerably stop 
adding the caustic-soda solution for a moment. Occasionally stir the mixture while the 
caustic-soda solution is being added, after which continue to stir until all the arsenic is 
dissolved. Without allowing the liquid to cool, add the sal soda and stir for a few 
moments, then add 1 gallon of water and continue to stir until the sal soda is com- 
pletely dissolved." According to Dr. Grafke, this method is preferred by a considerable 
number of experienced men. 
Cattle-Fever Ticks. 25 
Arsenic stock requires the following materials ready to hand 
before starting : 
Pounds. 
Caustic soda    4 
Wliite arsenic -_ 10 
Sal-soda crystals 10 
There should be also some means for heating the solution in case, 
as sometimes happens because of impure materials, lack of skill, or 
some unforeseen circumstance, the heat created by mixing the ma- 
terials should be insufficient to dissolve all the arsenic. 
In a 5-gallon kettle or metal1 pail place the 4 pounds of caustic 
soda, add 1 gallon of cold water, and stir with a stick until the caustic 
soda is practically all dissolved. Without delay begin adding the 
white arsenic, in portions of a pound or two at a time, as fast as it 
can be dissolved without causing the solution to boil, stirring all the 
time. If the liquid begins to boil, stop stirring and let it cool slightly 
before adding more arsenic. The secret of success is to work the 
arsenic in fast enough to keep the solution very hot—nearly but not 
quite at the boiling point. The result should be a clear solution, 
except for dirt. If the liquid persistently remains muddy or milky, 
it may be because the operation has been conducted so fast that much 
water has been boiled out and sodium arsenite is beginning to crys- 
tallize, so add another gallon of water and stir. If the solution does 
not then clear up, the caustic soda must have been very low grade, 
and the undissolved substance must be arsenic. In that case, put 
the kettle over the fire, heat nearly, but not quite, to boiling, and stir. 
As soon as the solution of arsenic is complete, dilute to about 4 gal- 
lons, add the sodium carbonate, and stir until dissolved. 
Cautions: It is necessary to avoid splashing. Hence never work hurriedly; 
stir deliberately and regularly ; do not dump in the arsenic and sal soda, but 
carefully slide them in from a grocer's scoop held close to the side of the pail 
and to the surface of the liquid. Perform the whole operation in a well-ven- 
tilated place and avoid inhaling, steam. 
After the solution has become cold add water to make it to exactly 
5 gallons,2 mix well, let settle, and draw off into containers which 
can be tightly corked or otherwise closed. Jugs or demijohns are 
best, but tin cans will serve if occasionally'inspected for leaks which 
may occur after a time through the action of the solution upon the 
solder of the can. 
1 The chemicals employed have no effect upon iron. 'They will, however, actively cor- 
rode zinc, tin, or solder ; hence a soldered pail must be watched for leaks and is far 
inferior to a seamless pail, stamped from a single sheet of iron. A tinned pail is pre- 
ferred to a galvanized one, but a plain iron seamless pail or an iron kettle should be 
obtained if possible. 
2 Best done by previously determining by measurement the depth of 5 gallons of water 
in the kettle. Set the kettle exactly level and mark the depth on a stick held vertically 
on the center of the bottom. 
26 Farmers9 Bulletin 1057. 
Tar stock is prepared thus : 
In a large metal pail dissolve three-fourths of a pound of caustic 
soda in 1 quart of water, add 1 gallon of pine tar, and stir thoroughly 
with a wooden paddle until the mixture, which at first looks streaked 
and muddy, brightens to a uniform, thick fluid somewhat resembling 
molasses. Test it by letting about a teaspoonful drip from the pad- 
dle into a glass of water (a glass fruit jar or a wide-mouth bottle will 
do) and stirring thoroughly with a sliver of wood. It should mix 
perfectly with the water. Globules of tar which can be seen by 
looking at the glass from underneath and which can not be blended 
with the water by repeated stirring indicate that more caustic-soda 
solution is needed. In that case make up more caustic-soda solution 
of the same strength and add it, not more than a pint at a time, with 
thorough stirring, until the desired effect is produced. 
If an appropriate glass vessel for making the test is not at hand, 
take a little of the mixture between the fingers, then dip the fingers 
under water and try to rub off the tar. It should leave the fingers 
perfectly clean after a little rubbing with water. If an oily coating 
remains, more caustic-soda solution is needed. Such an extra addi- 
' tion of caustic soda will be required only in case of a very low-grade 
chemical or a very highly acid tar. The tar stock should be kept in 
closed containers, such as a pail with a friction top. 
The quantity of S-B arsenic stock or of tar stock made in one 
operation can be varied as desired, provided the above-given pro- 
portions of the ingredients are adhered to. But one should attempt 
to work the S-B formula on a larger scale only after skill and 
experience have been acquired. 
MAKING THE BOILED DIP. 
The boiled dip is less convenient than the S-B dip, but the final 
composition and effect of dipping baths prepared from the two is the 
same. 
To make a 500-gallon bath provide : 
Sal-soda  crystals 24 pounds. 
White   arsenic ,     8 pounds. 
Pine tar     1 gallon. 
Put 25 gallons of water into a kettle or tank of from 40 to 50 gal- 
lons' capacity, heat to boiling, and add the sal soda. When this has 
dissolved add the white arsenic, then boil and stir for 15 minutes or 
longer, until the white arsenic has entirely disappeared. If intended 
for immediate use cool to 140° F. (by addition of cold water if 
desired), then pour in the pine tar in a thin stream while constantly 
and vigorously stirring the solution. Immediately empty the liquid 
into the dipping vat, which has already been three-fourths filled 
with water, and stir thoroughly. 
Cattle-Fever Ticks. 27 
All the utensils must be free from greasy or oily matter which 
would.coat the arsenic and hinder its solution. The operation of 
boiling requires constant attention to avoid loss by foaming. Hard 
water may be used, but in that case considerable undissolved mate- 
rial which, however, does not contain any arsenic, may be left after 
boiling. 
For a stock solution to be kept on hand and used when needed add 
no tar, but after the solution has become cold make it up to 25 
gallons, stir well, let settle, and draw off into containers which can 
be well closed. In this case the tar stock previously described is also 
required. 
DILUTING THE DIP TO  FORM A  BATH. 
First run water into the vat about three-fourths up to the dipping 
line, at which its capacity must be known. If tar stock is to be used 
the necessary amount will be one-third of a gallon for every 100 gal- 
lons of vat capacity. Measure it out, mix it with 2 or 3 times its 
volume of water and pour it along the surface of the water in the vat, 
stirring a little. 
Every 100 gallons of standard-strength1 bath calls for If pounds 
white arsenic, which quantity is contained in four-fifths of a gallon 
of S-B stock or in 5 gallons of boiled stock. From these figures the 
quantity of arsenic or stock needed to charge the vat may be cal- 
culated.    Or one may base the calculation on the following facts: 
One pound of white arsenic will make 62$ gallons of bath. 
One gallon of S-B stock will make 125 gallons of bath. 
One gallon of boiled arsenic stock will make 20 gallons of bath. 
All solutions of arsenic are considerably heavier than water and 
if carelessly pujb into the vat they may plunge to the bottom and 
be difficult to mix. Therefore always pour the arsenic stock or a 
proprietary dip in a thin stream evenly along the vat except at 
the shallow exit end. Another precaution to be taken in handling 
proprietary dips is never to mix them first with small quantities 
of water, which may "break" them. Pour them directly into the 
water in the vat. 
Finally add water up to the dipping line and stir well. An ex- 
cellent way to stir is by a pail tied to a rope. Sink it at the en- 
trance end of the vat and haul it along the bottom to the exit.   Then 
1 The standard strength here referred to is that employed throughout the area in which 
cooperative tick eradication is conducted. It is based on the supposition that the cattle 
will be dipped every two weeks throughout the season and meanwhile will remain under 
quarantine. If, however, they are to leave the quarantined area special precautions 
must be taken that they carry no tick infection, and consequently they are subjected to a 
stronger dip, namely, from 0.22 to 0.24 per cent arsenious oxid. The dipping must be 
done under supervision of an employee of the Bureau of Animal Industry and in accord- 
ance with regulations published in B. A. I. Order 263. 
28 Farmers' Bulletin 1057. 
raise it, throw it back to the entrance end, and haul through again, 
repeating as many times as necessary but always hauling through in 
the same direction. 
The standard-strength bath prepared as above contains practically 
0.19 per ceïit arsenious oxid when fresh. After use oxidation may 
set in and weaken it, but it will not need to be strengthened so 
long as it tests not less than 0.175 per cent arsenious oxid. 
To make up small quantities for spraying, to each 5 gallons of 
water measured out add first 2 fluid ounces (4 tablespoonfuls) of 
tar stock, and then 5| fluid ounces of S-B stock or 2^ pints of 
boiled arsenic stock. 
The standard strength of bath should be adhered to so far as 
possible because its effectiveness against ticks will effect eradica- 
tion in the least time and with fewest dippings. . But if time is 
not pressing it is sometimes best to begin with a lower strength, say 
0.14 or 0.15 per cent, and gradually work up to full strength as 
the cattle become accustomed to the treatment. This is certainly 
a wise method for the individual cattle owner who is outside the 
area of cooperative work and who lacks aid and advice from ex- 
perts. Weather conditions also need to be considered. Hot or moist 
weather is more trying to the cattle than cool or dry weather. The 
longer the time needed for the cattle to dry off after dipping, which 
of course primarily depends on the proportion of moisture in the 
air, the more liable they are to show blistering or other injury 
through the continued absorption of arsenic by the skin. The com- 
bination of heat and moisture is particularly bad and under such 
conditions it may be desirable, unless other conditions prohibit, to 
use the bath somewhat weaker than standard strength. The fol- 
lowing table shows the quantities of arsenic and stock solutions con- 
tained in 100 gallons of bath of different strengths, so that the 
quantities necessary to charge a vat of any size at any strength can 
be found by simple multiplication. 
TABLE 4.—Composition of dipping  baths. 
Per 100 gallons of bath. Per 100 gallons of bath. 
Actual 
arsenious 
Actual 
arsenious 
oxid. White S-B Boiled oxid. White S-B Boiled 
arsenic. stock. stock. arsenic. stock. stock. 
Per cent. Pounds. Gallons. Gallons. Per cent. Pounds. Gallons. Gallons. 
0.05 0.42 0.21 1.3 0.15 1.25 0.63 3.9 
.06 .50 .25 1.6 .16 1.33 .67 4.2 
.07 .58 .29 1.8 .17 1.41 .71 4.4 
.08 .66 .33 2.1 .18 1.49 .75 4.7 
.09 .75 .38 2.3 .19 1.58 .79 4.9 
.10 
.11 
.12 
.13 
.14 
.83 
.91 
1.00 
1.08 
1.16 
.42 
.46 
.50 
.54 
.58 
2.6 
2.8 
3.1 
3.4 
3.6 
.20 
.21 
.22 
.23 
.24 
1.66 
1.74 
1.83 
1.91 
2.00 
.83 
.87 
.92 
•    .96 
1.00 
Cattle-Fever Ticks. 29 
REPLENISHING  THE  BATH AND  CORRECTING  ITS  STRENGTH. 
As dipping goes on the bath naturally needs replenishing, and its 
strength probably needs correction from time to time. The causes 
which may lead to changes in the strength of arsenical baths, to- 
gether with methods for making chemical tests, have been discussed 
elsewhere.1 Before leaving the vat after dipping one may measure the 
depth of the bath or mark its level on the side of the vat. But even then 
at the next dipping one can not be certain just how much a change 
of level has affected the strength of the bath. For instance some of 
the bath may have leaked out from the bottom while rain water has 
run in from the top. Furthermore certain microorganisms can grow 
in the bath in spite of the presence of the poisonous arsenic, and can 
greatly affect its strength. As already mentioned, the active ingre- 
dient of the bath is sodium arsenite. The microorganisms in the proc- 
ess of growth can transfer oxygen from the air to the sodium 
arsenite, thus converting it to sodium arsenate, a distinctly different 
compound of arsenic and much less poisonous to ticks. 
The rate at which a bath may lose strength through oxidation de- 
pends on conditions and is very variable, but ordinarily is sufficiently 
rapid to weaken the bath decidedly in a month or two. There is, 
also, a certain species of microorganism which can grow in baths 
through which large numbers of cattle are passed frequently and 
which operates in precisely the opposite manner from those men- 
tioned above, namely, by reducing arsenate to arsenite, thus render- 
ing the bath stronger. 
It is therefore plain that the only sure way to get proper results 
from successive dippings in the same bath is to make a chemical test 
of its strength shortly before each dipping. The Bureau of Animal 
Industry provides all officials engaged in cooperative eradication 
work with outfits for making this test. It is easily carried out by a 
properly qualified person, and the cattle owner who dips privately 
should have his baths tested in the same way. If a sample must be 
sent away for test certain precautions are necessary. First stir the 
bath well. Fill the bottle (not less than one-fourth pint) nearly to 
the neck and at once carefully add concentrated formaldehyde2 
(which is cheap and can be obtained from a druggist) with a medi- 
cine dropper in the proportion of 5 drops to each one-fourth pint. 
Cork tightly and send at once. 
No anxiety need be felt regarding the accumulation of oxidized 
arsenic in the bath during a single season's use. Experiments by the 
Bureau of Animal Industry have shown sodium arsenate to be far 
1 U. S. Department of Agriculture Bulletins 76 and 259. 
2 This is to act as a preservative against microorganisms, which may act much more 
rapidly in a small sample than in the original bath in its comparatively cool location 
underground. 
30 Farmers9 Bulletin 1057. 
less injurious to cattle than sodium arsenite. Field experience, too, 
indicates that under ordinary conditions, provided the vat has been 
cleaned out and freshly charged in the spring, danger of injury from 
this cause need not be considered. 
In practice, baths nearly always are both strengthened and re- 
plenished in one operation and it is decidedly the simplest and best 
procedure. First run water in up to the dipping line, at which 
the capacity is known, and stir thoroughly. Take out a sample and 
test it to determine the per cent of arsenious oxid. Then find out, by 
referring to Table 4; how much arsenic or stock, whichever is to be 
used, is actually contained in 100 gallons of the bath as it stands. 
Subtract that quantity from the quantity which corresponds 
to the desired strength of bath, and multiply the remainder by the 
number of hundreds of gallons of vat capacity. This calculated 
quantity of stock, by strict mathematics, is not quite sufficient to 
reach the desired percentage, particularly if the comparatively 
weak boiled stock is used, but it will be close enough for all practical 
purposes. 
Another method of calculation which requires no reference table 
and is particularly useful when proprietary dips are employed, is the 
following: If it is not already known, calculate the quantity of 
arsenic or concentrate which would be needed to make up an entirely 
fresh charge of the desired strength. Then determine the fractional 
part of this quantity necessary to raise the strength of the existing 
bath to the desired point. For example, suppose 10 gallons of a certain 
proprietary dip is required for a fresh charge of the vat to the de- 
sired strength of 0.18 per cent arsenious oxid, while the strength 
of the vat actually in the vat is found by test to be 0.15 per cent. 
Then the bath is too weak by 0.03 per cent, and three-eighteenths of 
10 gallons of the dip will have to be added. 
In course of time filth and mud will accumulate in the bath to 
such an extent that the vat will need to be emptied, cleaned out and 
recharged. Cattle dipped in a bath loaded with filth and mud will 
necessarily carry out more bath on their bodies, and so more arsenic 
than they should; also they will dry off more slowly, and very 
naturally will be more likely to be blistered. By the same line of 
reasoning some field men of the Bureau of Animal Industry say that 
after a vat has been charged no more tar or tar stock should 
be added in replenishing the bath, particularly if work oxen are to 
be dipped. From experience they have come to believe that tar 
cements together the filth and mud carried out by the animals and 
so increases the chance of injury. At any rate it appears to be good 
practice to reduce the quantity of tar added as the bath- becomes 
dirtier. 
Cattle-Fever Ticks. 31 
On similar grounds is based the important general rule never to 
use in the spring a bath carried over the winter. Such a bath usually 
will have become largely oxidized so that when brought up to 
strength as respects actual arsenious oxid it may be dangerously 
high in total arsenic. It is at the first one or two dippings in the 
spring that cattle are most prone to suffer injury, especially when 
they have come through the winter in poor condition or are still in 
long hair. They must therefore at least be given the advantage of 
being dipped in a fresh, clean bath. 
PRECAUTIONS  IN  THE  USE  OF ARSENIC  AND  ARSENICAL  DIPS. 
The fact that arsenic is a violent poison is what renders it valuable, 
for the fever tick is hard to kill. But, like a keen-edged tool, it may 
be decidedly dangerous if ignorantly or carelessly handled. Three 
possibilities of danger must be kept constantly in mind; danger to 
oneself, danger to other persons, danger to animals. 
The dry, powdered white arsenic should be kept in a tightly 
covered pail, plainly labeled. Paper bags are unsafe because they 
easily burst, and arsenic so scattered about looks harmless enough. 
In weighing or otherwise handling the arsenic avoid raising dust 
or breathing it in, if raised, and keep it off the skin and clothing. - 
In mixing or boiling stock solutions work only in a well-ventilated 
place, and on the windward side of the kettle so that steam arising 
from it will not be inhaled. 
The stock solutions are in some respects more dangerous than the 
original substance because the arsenic in them is already in solution 
and can act very quickly. If any gets on the skin or clothing it 
must be washed off without delay. Cattle must be kept away from 
such solutions or from anything that has been in contact with them, 
for cattle craving salt have been poisoned by licking the outside of 
leaky barrels and by licking the earth around dipping vats where 
a little concentrate had been carelessly spilled in charging the vat. 
All such poisoned earth must be removed, buried and replaced by 
fresh. 
The diluted bath is naturally much less dangerous, but no chances 
can be taken with it. No puddles from which animals may drink 
should be allowed to accumulate. The persons who do the dipping 
should not allow the skin or clothing to be wet by the dip any more 
or any longer than absolutely necessary. When spraying, the opera- 
tor should see to it that neither he nor the animals inhale any of the 
spray. 
When a vat is to be emptied the approved practice is to run the 
waste bath into a pit properly guarded by a fence, where it will 
gradually seep away under the surface and do no harm, provided 
32 Farmers* Bulletin 1057.   . 
only that seepage can not be carried: to a "well, stream,lor spring 
from which any person or domestic animal may drink; 
The symptoms of arsenical poisoning are rather variable and also 
depend on the size of the dose and the method of administratioü. 
If an animal sickens or dies shortly after dipping it by no means fol- 
lows that arsenical poisoning or any other effect of the dipping is thö 
cause. Very few cattle relative to the total number dipped have suf- 
fered undoubted arsenical poisoning and in most of the cases the 
cause could be traced to somebody's error or carelessness. 
In regard to arsenical poisoning of human beings there is a stand- 
ard antidote which may be obtained at any drug store with directions 
for use. It should be kept on hand for emergencies. If the antidote 
is not at hand the poison must be removed from the stomach by en- 
couraging repeated vomiting, and soothing drinks such as milk, 
white of eggs and water, or flour and water must be freely given 
meanwhile. A suspected case of arsenical poisoning must have the 
attention of a physician at the earliest possible moment, as some- 
times the poison works very quickly. 
WASHINGTON : GOVERNMENT PRJNTINGLOFFICE : IftlS 