 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Historic, archived document 
  
Do not assume content reflects current 
scientific knowledge, policies, or practices. 
 
Issued October 16,1912.
U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY.—CIRCULAR 207^
A. D. MELVIN, CHIEF OF BUREAU.
follows
DIRECTIONS FOR CONSTRUCTING VATSl^ND
CATTLE TO DESTROY
BY
H. W. GRAYBILL, D. V. M.,
Assistant Zoologist\ Zoological Division,
AND
W. P. ELLENBERGER, D.V.S.,
Veterinary Inspector; Inspection Division.
[A Revision of Bureau of Animal Industry Circular 183.]
WASHINGTON:
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE.
1912.
BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY.
Chief: A. D. MELVIN.
Assistant Chief: A. M. FARRINGTON.
Chief Clerk: CHARLES C. CARROLL.
Animal Husbandry Division: GEORGE M. ROMMEL, chief.
Biochemic Division: M. DORSET, chief.
Dairy Division: B. H. RAWL, chief.
Field Inspection Division: R. A. RAMSAY, chief.
Meat Inspection Division: RICE P. STEDDOM, chief.
Pathological Division: JOHN R. MOHLER, chief.
Quarantine Division: RICHARD W. HICKMAN, chief.
Zoological 'Division: B. H. RANSOM, chief.
Experiment Station: E. C. SCHROEDER, superintendent
Editor: JAMES M. PICKENS,
2
ADDITIONAL COPIES of thfa publicationJLX. may be procured from the SUPERINTEND-ENT OF DOCUMENTS, Government PrintingOffice, Washington, D. C, at 5 cents per copy
LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL.
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY,
Washington, D. C, August P, 1912.
SIR: I have the honor to transmit the accompanying paper en-
titled " Directions for Constructing Vats and Dipping Cattle to
Destroy Ticks," by Drs. H. W. Graybill and W. P. Ellenberger, of
this bureau. This circular, which is a revision of Circular 183, not
only gives directions for preparing arsenical dips and for dipping
cattle, but contains plans and specifications for the construction of
suitable dipping vats. It has been prepared to meet the need for
such information in connection with the work being done by the
bureau in cooperation with State and local authorities for the eradi-
cation of the ticks which spread the contagion of Texas or southern
cattle fever. I respectfully recommend that it be published in the
circular series of this bureau.
Respectfully,
A. D. MELVIN,
Chief of Bureau.
Hon. JAMES WILSON,
Secretary of Agriculture.
CONTENTS.
Page.
Arsenical dips 5
Preparation and use of arsenical dips 6
Precautions in the use of arsenic 10
Method of dipping 11
Rule for calculating the capacity of a dipping vat 12
Specifications for the construction of a concrete cattle-dipping vat 13
Site '. 13
Excavation 13
Forms 13
Concrete. 13
Waterproofing ,. 15
Exit incline 16
Slide 16
Cover 16
Dripping pen 17
Chute 17
Bill of materials for vat, dripping pen, and chute. 17
Specifications for the construction of a brick dipping vat 18
Materials . 18
Excavation and construction - - - - 20
Bill of materials for brick vat, dripping pen, and chute 20
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Page.
FIG. 1. Plans for a concrete dipping vat 14
2. Plans for a brick dipping vat 19
4
DIRECTIONS FOR CONSTRUCTING VATS AND DIPPING
CATTLE TO DESTROY TICKS.
In the course of the work of tick eradication, which the Bureau of
Animal Industry has undertaken in cooperation with the States of
the quarantined area, there has arisen a demand for a brief publica-
tion treating of the preparation and use of arsenical dips and giving
plans and specifications for a dipping vat suited to the conditions
and requirements on the ordinary farm.1 It is with the view of
supplying this information that the present circular has been pre-
pared. Those who may desire information on the life history of
the tick or further information relating to methods of its eradication
are referred to more extensive publications on those subjects.2
ARSENICAL DIPS.
Arsenical dips as agents for destroying cattle ticks have come into
much favor during the past few years. This has been due to their
efficacy, cheapness, the ease with which they are prepared, and the
comparatively slight injury they cause to cattle when properly pre-
pared and used. Homemade dips are the ones most commonly used,
and are quite satisfactory in every way when ordinary care is observed
in their preparation. Recently there has been placed on the market a
proprietary concentrated arsenical dip which has given good results.
This dip is prepared for use by diluting it with cold water in the
proportions of 1 to 100. It is entirely possible that in the near
future other concentrated arsenical dips will be successfully prepared.
The only advantage in such dips is that comparatively little time is
required in preparing the bath, but this advantage is largely counter-
balanced by the fact that they are more expensive than homemade
dips.
1 In preparing the plans of the vat shown in this circular consideration has been given
to the question of cost as well as to practicability of design. The plans for a vat that has
been used extensively and with much success by bureau inspectors in the tick-eradication
work in Alabama have been followed in part.
2 Farmers' Bulletin 498, Bureau of Animal Industry Bulletins 130 and 152, and Bureau
of Entomology Bulletin 72, all issued by the United States Department of Agriculture.
5
6 DIPS AND DIPPING VATS FOR DESTROYING CATTLE TICKS.
PREPARATION AND USE OF ARSENICAL. DIPS.
The formula most commonly used in making an arsenical dip is
the following:
Sodium carbonate (sal soda) pounds._ 24
Arsenic trioxid (white arsenic) do S
Pine tar gallon__ 1
Water sufficient to make 500 gallons.
If for any reason a stronger dip is desired, 25 pounds of sodium
carbonate and 10 pounds of arsenic trioxid may be used in place of
the amounts given in the above formula. The stronger dip ia re-
quired by the regulations of the Bureau of Animal Industry in the
dipping of cattle which are to enter interstate commerce from quar-
antined areas, but for ordinary eradication work when immediate
removal of the cattle to tick-free areas is net contemplated it will
probably be best to use the weaker solution, and this is especially
true during hot weather and when the animals are to be treated
every two weeks.
In preparing the dip a large caldron or galvanized tank is required
for heating the water in which to dissolve the chemicals. Twenty-
five gallons of water should be placed in the caldron or tank and
brought to a boil. The amount of sodium carbonate indicated in the
formula is then added and dissolved by stirring. When this is accom-
plished, the required amount of arsenic is added and dissolved in a
similar manner. The fire is then drawn, and the solution permitted
to cool to 140° F., or this process may be hastened by the addition
of cold water. The pine tar is then added slowly in a thin stream
and thoroughly mixed with the solution by constant stirring. This
solution should be diluted at once to 500 gallons.
If a large enough caldron or tank is available for preparing the
dip, a greater quantity of solution may be prepared at one time,
always, of course, in the same proportions as the above. In this way
the time required in preparing the amount of solution necessary to
fill a vat is reduced considerably. In case it is necessary to use a
smaller container, say of about the capacity of 15 gallons, only half
the amount of solution indicated should be prepared at one time, the
quantities of ingredients used being half those in the formula. This
will, however,' require so much time in preparing the amount of solu-
tion necessary to fill a vat that when possible it is advisable to provide
a larger vessel for dissolving the chemicals.
The caldron or tank and utensils used in preparing the dip should
be kept free from grease or oil, as small quantities of these may
envelop particles of arsenic and prevent or hinder the solution of the
arsenic. It should also be borne in mind that when hard water is*
used in the preparation of the dip the dissolving of the sodium car-]
BIFS AND DIPPING VATS FOR DESTROYING OATTLE TICKS. 7
bonate' (sal soda) in the boiling water results in the formation of a
fine white or gray insoluble powder or precipitate of lime salts, which
may be taken for undissolved arsenic and thus lead to the belief that
all of the arsenic has not gone into solution.
The arsenical solution, when prepared according to the above
method, should be diluted as soon as the pine tar has been added
in order that the tar may become properly emulsified. In the con-
centrated solution the tar tends to separate out, especially when the
solution becomes cold, and collect in a layer at the bottom of the
container. Even when this plan of immediately diluting the solution
is followed a satisfactory emulsion is not always obtained and some
of the tar may separate and go to the bottom of the vat.
If, however, the acids present in the tar are neutralized by the use
of concentrated lye, a good emulsion of the tar in the diluted dip may
be obtained.1 The neutralization is effected by dissolving 1 pound of
concentrated lye in a quart of waiter for wery gallon1 of tar to be used
and adding this solution to the tar, stirring thoroughly. When the
acids of the tar have been properly neutralized the resulting mixture
should be a bright, thick fluid of a dark brown color. Whether the
acids have been neutralized or not may be determined by taking a
small quantity of the tar on the blade of a pocket knife or on a sliver
of wood and stirring it in a glass of water. If the acids have been
neutralized the tar will mix uniformly with the water, whereas if
they have not been neutralized the tar will float about in the water
in the form of various sized globules that will settle to the bottom,
when the agitation of the water ceases. For all ordinary grades of
tar 1 pound of lye to the gallon will be ample to effect neutraliza-
tion; but if on testing it is found that the amount has not been suf-
ficient, it will be necessary to add more lye solution—about a pint at
SL time for each gallon—until the test shows that the acids have been
neutralized. The neutralized tar should be added to the diluted
arsenical dip and not to the concentrated solution, with which it will
not mix satisfactorily. When the neutralized tar is used the vat
should be filled with diluted arsenic-soda solution prepared in the
usual way. The required amount of neutralized tar, diluted with
two to three times its volume of water, should then be added to the
solution in the vat and thoroughly mixed with the same by stirring.
Before filling a vat the capacity at the depth to which it is neces-
sary to fill it for dipping, if not known, should be calculated, and
for future convenience the water line should be plainly marked at
some point on the wall of the vat. Unless this is done rt will be
necessary either to calculate the amount of water in the vat each
time it is filled or to measure it as it is placed in the vat, both of
1 This method for emulsifying the tar has been suggested by the Biochemic Division of
this bureau.
8 DIPS AND DIPPING VATS FOB DESTBOYING CATTLE TICKS.
~which procedures will consume considerable unnecessary time. The
most convenient way to get the water into the vat is to conduct it
through pipes, either directly from a pump or from an elevated tank
used for storing water for farm purposes. Frequently, however,
it is not possible to bring the water to the vat through pipes, and
it becomes necessary to resort to the laborious process of hauling it
in barrels on wagons or sleds.
In case the pine tar is added to the concentrated solution when
it is made, in which case, as already stated, it is necessary to dilute
the solution at once, the vat should be partly filled with water and
then the arsenical solution added as it is made. For example, if
the vat holds 2,000 gallons, about 1,500 gallons of water should be
placed in the vat, then four times the amount of solution for mak-
ing 500 gallons of dip should be prepared and mixed with the water,
after which the vat should be filled to the 2,000-gallon mark. Within
certain limits it is immaterial just how much water is added at first,
provided, of course, ample allowance is made for the volume of the
concentrated dip, so that when it is added the dip line will not come
above the mark to which the vat is to be filled.
The capacity of the vats planned in this circular at a depth of
5 feet 3 inches is 1,470 gallons. In order to fill it to that depth with
dip it will be necessary to prepare two batches of concentrated dip,
each containing the ingredients necessary for making 500 gallons
of diluted dip, and a third batch containing 7 pounds 9 ounce? of
arsenic and 22 pounds 3 ounces of sodium carbonate in case 8 pounds
of arsenic are being used to the 500 gallons, or 9 pounds 7 ounces
of arsenic and 22 pounds 8 ounces of sodium carbonate in case 10
pounds of arsenic are being used to the 500 gallons, .
A stock arsenical solution is found convenient for replenishing the
dip in a vat when it has gotten too low for dipping. A stock solution
in which the ingredients for 500 gallons of dip are dissolved in 25
gallons of water may be used. In making up the stock solution the
arsenic and sal soda for 500 gallons should be dissolved in the usual
manner in 25 gallons of water. The tar should not be added to the'
stock solution. Special care should be observed to see that the solu-
tion after boiling and cooking measures 25 gallons, and any deficiency •'
due to evaporation during boiling should be made up by adding cold1
water. Nineteen parts of water to one part of this solution will give
the proper dilution. The tar, neutralized in the manner already de-
scribed, should be mixed with the solution after it has been diluted,
in the proportion of about half a pint for every 30 gallons of diluted
dip.
In diluting stock solutions great care should always be observed in
measuring the amount of solution and water used. A small error in
measuring the amount of stock solution required is likely to cause a
DIPS AND DIPPING VATS FOR DESTROYING CATTLE TICKS. 9
considerable variation in the arsenic content of the dip, especially
if the quantity prepared is small. If "the variation happens to be in
the direction of too low a per cent of arsenic the treatment may not
prove effective, whereas if it happens to be in the other direction cattle
that are treated may be injured or even killed. Care is especially
necessary in the case of a certain highly concentrated proprietary dip,
to be used at a dilution of 1 to 100. In using this great care should
be observed in measuring the amount required, and the dilution
recommended should be strictly followed. The same caution should
be observed in the case of any other concentrated arsenical dips that
may later appear on the market.
The arsenical dip may be left in the vat and used repeatedly, re-
plenishing it with the proper quantities of water and stock solution
when necessary. When, however, the dip becomes filthy through the
addition of manure and dirt carried in by the cattle, the vat should be
emptied, cleaned, and filled with fresh fluid. The frequency with
which this should be done must be left to the owner, as the condition
of the dip at any period after it has been made depends on a variety
of conditions, such as the number of cattle dipped, the frequency of
the dippings, etc. Even though the dip may not become very filthy,
its efficacy decreases somewhat on standing, owing to gradual oxida-
tion of the arsenic. It is therefore advisable to recharge the vat at
intervals irrespective of the condition of the dip as to cleanliness.1
In order that dipping in arsenic may be both efficacious in destroy-
ing ticks and also harmless to the cattle at all times, it is of the
highest importance that the dip be of the proper strength when made
and that it be maintained as far as practicable at that strength. Due
care in making the dip and in calculating the capacity of the vat
will, of course, assure the correct initial strength of the dip. Pro-
viding the vat with a waterproof cover will do much to maintain
the dip at its proper strength by preventing, on the one hand, con-
centration by evaporation, and on the other hand dilution by rains.
A cover will also reduce the risk of .cattle being poisoned during the
intervals between dippings, especially when the vat is not protected
by a fence. During rains the water from the draining pen and
chute should not be permitted to run into the vat and dilute the dip.
At the conclusion of each dipping, especially if the vat is without
a cover, it is well to mark the position of the surface of the dip on
the side of the vat in order to determine at the next dipping whether
there has been a change in the level of the dip. If the surface of the
dip has fallen and it is known that the vat does not leak, therk has
1Mr. R. M. Chapin, of the Biochemic Division, has devised a portable test case for
testing arsenical dips in the field, which has been shown to be a practical success after ex-
tensive field tests. With this device, it is now possible to ascertain quickly the strength
of the dip in a vat, and thus determine when the vat should be recharged. It is the inten-
tion of the bureau to place test outfits in the hands of the men engaged in tick eradication.
57489°—Cir. 207—12 2
10 DIPS AND DIPPING VATS FOR DESTEOYING CATTLE TICKS.
been a loss of water by evaporation and consequently an increase in
the strength of the dip. In order to bring the dip down to its
former strength water should be run into the vat until the dip sur-
face reaches the mark made at the last dipping. If the fall has
been due to the vat leaking, the strength of the dip has not been
altered, and consequently water alone should not be added. If the
dip surface has been raised by rain the amount of water added in
this way should be determined by calculation, and for every 19 gal-
lons of water 1 gallon of the stock solution previously mentioned
should be used.
PRECAUTIONS IN THE USE OF ARSENIC.
Because of the fact that arsenic is a poison, great care should bo
observed in caring for it after it is purchased from the druggist, in
order that persons and animals may not be accidentally poisoned.
The dip at the time it is being made and also after it is diluted
should be handled and protected as a poison. Unless such pre-
cautions are observed accidents are very likely to occur. When,
however, arsenic is handled with the proper care, there is no more
danger in its use on the farm than in the use of a number of other
poisons that are commonly and regularly employed by farmers for
destroying insect pests of plants and obnoxious rodents.
Persons using the dip, especially with the spray pump, should not
subject their hands and other portions of the body, by permitting their
clothing to become wet, to the action of the dip any more than is
necessary, and it is well to wash the hands thoroughly after each
spraying, especially when they are frequently exposed to the dip.
At the time the dip is being prepared, care should be observed not to
inhale the vapor arising from the caldron or kettle, and during
spraying the same precaution should be exercised against the in-
halation of the spray.
In making the dip, weights and measures should not be guessed at,
and the arsenic especially should be weighed with the greatest care.
Cattle should always be watered a short time before they are
dipped. After they emerge from the vat they should be kept on a
draining floor until the dip ceases to run from their bodies; then they
should be placed in a yard free of vegetation until they are entirely
dry. If cattle are allowed to drain in places where pools of dip
collect, from which they may drink, or are turned at once on the
pasture, where the dip will run from their bodies on the grass and
other vegetation, losses are likely to result. Crowding the animals
before they are dry should also be avoided, and they should not be
driven any considerable distance within a week after dipping, espe-
cially in hot weather.- If many repeated treatments are given the
cattle should not be treated oftener than every two weeks.
DIPS AND DIPPING VATS FOR DESTROYING CATTLE TICKS. 11
In addition to properly protecting vats containing arsenical dip
when not in use, caution must also be observed when vats are to be
emptied for cleaning. The dip should not be poured or allowed to
flow on land and vegetation to which cattle or other animals have
access. The best plan is to run the dip into a pit properly protected
by fences. The dip should also not be deposited where it may be
carried by seepage into wells or springs which supply water used on
the farm.
Dalrymple and Kerr1 have suggested a method of rendering the
arsenical dip harmless by the use of air-slaked lime and copperas
(ferrous sulphate). This method should not. however, be used alone,
but rather as a precautionary measure supplementary to the plan sug-
gested above for disposing of the dip. The process consists in using
6 pounds each of air-slaked lime and copperas to each 100 gallons of
dip to be treated. The required amount of lime is first added to the
dip and thoroughly mixed with it by stirring. After this treatment
the dip should be permitted to stand for at least an hour. The cop-
peras should then be dissolved in hot water and the solution while
still hot should be added slowly to the dip and well mixed with the
same by stirring. The dip should then be permitted to stand for at
least 12 hours, after which it may be removed from the vat and dis-
posed of in the way suggested.2
METHOD OF DIPPING.
The procedure to be followed in dipping animals on a farm de-
pends on the end that is sought in undertaking the treatment. If it
is simply desired to reduce and keep down the infestation of ticks on
a farm it will only be necessary for the owner to keep his animals
under observation and dip them when, according to his judgment,
treatment is necessary to keep the ticks under control. Such a pro-
cedure may well be followed where the regular tick eradication is not
under way; that is, in instances in which' it is not yet practicable or
expedient to rid farms completely of ticks.
If, however, it is desired to rid the farm completely of ticks—and
this should be the purpose in every case in which it is practicable and
expedient—it will be necessary to dip all cattle, and also any horses,,
mules, or asses that may harbor the cattle tick, at regular intervals,
until all ticks have disappeared from the farm. The purpose of such
1W. H. Dalrymple and A. P. Kerr. Bulletin 132, Louisiana Agricultural Experiment
Station.
3 The Biochemic Division of this bureau is at present investigating the process proposed
by Dalrymple, together with other possible processes for attaining the same end. The^
essential part in the process is played by caustic lime, which when present in excess pre-
cipitates all but practically inappreciable traces of the arsenic as insoluble calcium
arsenite. It is therefore desirable to use quicklime in place of the air-slaked lime
recommended by Dalrymple, slaking it with water in the usual manner before adding to*
the dip, while the addition of ferrous sulphate appears to be unnecessary.
12 DIPS AND DIPPING VATS FOR DESTROYING CATTLE TICKS.
dipping is to prevent as nearly as possible any engorged females drop-
ping to the pasture and there laying eggs which in time may develop
into young ticks. In order to do this it is necessary to dip at inter-
vals short enough so that no tick after getting on the cattle will have
time to mature and drop off before the next dipping. An interval
between dippings of two weeks is considered most satisfactory. This
interval, however, may be increased somewhat if necessary^ but it
should never be greater than three weeks.
In freeing a farm of ticks the dipping should not be discontinued
until it has been determined with certainty that the cattle and prem-
ises are free of ticks. It should be borne in mind that it is almost
impossible to determine by a few inspections, even if carried out with
great care, that animals are free from ticks. If the treatment is dis-
continued and a few unobserved ticks are still on the animals, these,
on: maturing and dropping, are likely to give rise to a new brood of
young ticks. Moreover, even if the cattle are Actually free from ticks,
the fact should not be lost sight of that there may still be engorged
females, eggs, and seed ticks on the premises. This is most likely to
be the case during the colder part 01 the year when the development
of the tick on the ground progresses slowly and also when any seed
ticks that may be present are likely to be slow in reaching the cattle
because of inactivity resulting from the low temperature.
RULE FOR CALCULATING THE CAPACITY OF A DIPPING VAT.1
a. Reduce all dimensions to the same denomination, feet or inches.
6. Add the length of the bottom of the vat to the length at the
water line.
c. Add the width of the bottom to the width at the water line.
d. Multiply these sums (b and e) together.
e. Multiply the length of the bottom by the width of the bottom.
/. Multiply th& length at the water line by the width at the water
line.
g. Add together d, e, and /.
A. Multiply this sum (g) by one-sixth the perpendicular depth
from the water line to the bottom, which gives the capacity of the
vat in cubic feet or cubic inches.
i. If the capacity in cubic inches has been obtained, divide k by
231; if the capacity in cubic feet has been obtained, divide h by
0.1336. In either case the result will be the capacity of the vat in
gallons.
This method is mathematically accurate if the vat is set level, but
if it is set so that it is slightly lower at one end than at the other, as
is usual, the true capacity can not be obtained by this method. If,
1 This rule has been adapted by Dr. B. H. Ransom from a mathematical formula for
calculating the volume of a prismoid.
DIPS AND DIPPING VATS FOR DESTROYING CATTLE TICKS. 13
however, the figures for the width at the water line and the depth
are taken from measurements at the middle of the vat the results
obtained will vary only very slightly from the actual capacity.
SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF A CONCRETE
CATTLE-DIPPING VAT.
SITE.
The site selected for the location of the vat should be dry and of
sufficient size to admit of the construction of the chute, the dripping
pen, and at least two additional pens—one for holding the cattle
prior to dipping and the other for retaining them after dipping
until sufficiently dried.
EXCAVATION.
The excavation should be made 1 foot wider and 1 foot longer
than the inside dimensions of the vat and should conform to its
shape. The inside dimensions of the vat are shown on the drawings
(fig. 1) and are as follows: Length at top of vat, 26 feet; bottom, 12
feet. Width at top, 3 feet; at bottom, 1J feet. Depth, 6J feet.
The sides and bottom of the excavation should be firm and solid,
as they are to serve for the outside forms in casting the concrete.
If it is necessary to do any filling in order to conform to the shape
of the vat, the filling should be puddled and thoroughly rammed
until solid, because the stability of the concrete depends on the
foundation.
FORMS.
The wooden forms should be constructed of 1-inch boards and 2 by
4 iilch braces, the boards being nailed to the outside face of the braces,
as shown in the drawings. The sides and end walls should be built 8
inches higher than the surface of the ground, which should be level.
CONCRETE.
The poncrete should be made of 1 part of cement, by measure, 2|
parts of sand, and 5 parts of broken rock or gravel. The cement
should be of a standard brand of Portland, the sand clean and coarse,
and the broken rock from about £-inch pieces to not larger than will
pass in every direction through a 1-inch ring.
Mixing.—The mixing should be done on a tight wooden platform
or in a tight box. The sand and stone should be measured in a bot-
tomless box, 2£ feet long by 2 feet wide by 1 foot deep, having a
capacity of 5 cubic feet. A convenient size of batch to mix is one
consisting of 2 bags of cement, 1 measure (5 cubic feet) of sand, and
2 measures (10 cubic feet) of stone.
mmmmmmmm.
s
s
o
a
H
o
W
00
FIG. 1.—Plans for a concrete dipping vat.
A^D DIPPINO VATS.FQB DESTROYING CATTLE TICKS., 15
The sand is measured out first and the cement emptied on top, after
which the two materials are thoroughly mixed together, dry. In the
meantime the stone may be measured out and thoroughly drenched
with water. The cement-sand mixture is mixed with water and the
resulting mortar then combined with the stone. The stone should be
shoveled on the mortar, which has been previously spread out in a
thin layer. Mixing should continue until the stone is thoroughly
coated with mortar, more water being added during the mixing
process if necessary.
Laying.—Before laying the concrete the molds should be set and
thoroughly braced into place. The side forms may be suspended in
the excavation with their lower edges 6 inches from the bottom by
means of crosspieces nailed to the uprights and of sufficient length
to rest on supports located several feet from the edges of the excava-
tion. The concrete for the bottom and incline is deposited first,
this mixture being of a consistency that water will flush to the sur-
face on ramming. The mixtures for the sides and end should be
very wet and should be thoroughly puddled into place. The con-
sistency of the concrete for the side walls should be such that it will
run off the shovel unless handled quickly.
The laying of the concrete should be done, if possible, in one opera-
tion, in order that there may be no joints between the new and old
work. If it becomes necessary to lay the concrete on two or more
days the surface on which the new concrete is to be deposited should
be washed thoroughly clean and coated with grout of pure Portland
cement and water mixed to the consistency of cream. The new con-
crete should be placed before the grout has set. Extreme care should
be taken to prevent dirt from falling in on top of the deposited
concrete.
The forms should not be removed until the concrete is set, which
in moderate weather will have taken place in about 24 hours. In.
damp, cold weather at least 48 hours should be allowed before remov-
ing the forms. It will be advisable, especially in water-soaked
ground, to allow the forms to remain in place for one week before
removal.
Finishing coat.—Before applying the surf ace coat dampen the walls
and floor thoroughly. Cover the entire exposed surface of the floor
and walls with a coating one-half inch thick of cement mortar com-
posed of Portland cement 1 part, sand 2 parts. Coating to be floated
and troweled to a smooth finish.
WATERPROOFING.
If the earth around the vat is thoroughly drained the vat may be
waterproofed by painting the surface coat, but painting the surface
16 DIPS AND DIPPING VATS FOR DESTROYING CATTLE TICKS.
will not give satisfactory results if there is ground water to seep in.
The paint may be good hot pine tar, or gas-house tar cut with naphtha
or gasoline and applied with a brush, or after the mortar coat has
hardened the inside of the vat may be painted with an 6il-cement
paint made as follows:1 Mix enough water with Portland cement to
make a fairly stiff paste; add to this 5 per cent of heavy petroleum
residuum oil based on the weight of the cement, and mix thoroughly
until the oil entirely disappears, then add more water and stir until
a paint of the consistency of cream is formed. This paint should be
-applied with a brush and should be well rubbed into the surface.
Should the mortar coat be omitted the paint coat should be applied
directly to the surface of the concrete.
EXIT INCLINE.
If the exit incline is to-have a false wooden floor it will be necessary
to embed iron bolts in the concrete, to which the wooden floor may be
fastened. Before the concrete incline is laid embed in the dirt three
pieces of 2 by 4 inch scantling, placed at the top, center, and bottom
of the incline. The bolts should extend through these pieces and
should be placed with the head next to the dirt. The bolts should be
long enough to extend through the concrete and the inch boards of
the floor, so that the wooden floor may be securely fastened.
The exit incline may be constructed without a false bottom. In
this case bricks laid on edge and embedded in the concrete will form
cleats to allow the animals to leave the vat readily. The cleats
should be about 14 inches apart and project about 2 inches.
SLIDE.
Cover the slide with a sheet of boiler iron properly fastened to the
cement.
COVER.
The cover of the vat consists of two leaves hinged on posts set 3
feet in the ground along each side of the vat. The leaves are 2 feet
C inches wide, and when open rest against the upper part of the
posts to which they are hinged and serve as splashboards. The
details of the hinge 2 used and the method of setting it are shown
in the drawings. When the leaves are open their lower edges are
just above the top of the side walls, which are given a slope inward
for the purpose of conducting the dip running from the splash-
boards back into the vat. Eemovable doors should be constructed to
close the triangular openings left at the ends of the vat when the
cover is closed. The hinges may be made by a blacksmith.
1 These directions for the oil-cement paint are furnished by the Office of Public Roads
of the United States Department of Agriculture.
2 This hinge and the method of setting it for the cover of a dipping vat have been
copied from an article by William Taylor Heslop in the Agricultural Journal of the Union
of South Africa, Pretoria, vol. 1, No. 1, 1911, pp. 38-43.
DH>S AND DIPPING VATS FOB DESTROYING CATTLE TICKS. 17
DRIPPING PEN.
Construct a dripping pen about 12 by 15,feet at the head of the
exit incline. The floor should be of concrete prepared as previously
described for the vat and laid in a similar manner. The floor should
be pitched toward a corner of the pen, where a pipe should be laid
in the floor to carry the drippings into a barrel sunk in the ground.
The drippings thus caught may be returned to the vat after settling.
The floor should be roughened to prevent the cattle from slipping.
CHUTE.
The chute leading to the vat should be built 30 inches wide and 20
feet long, and the receiving and retaining pens should be of a size to
take care of the animals to be dipped.
BILL OF MATERIALS FOR VAT, DRIPPING PEN, AND CHUTE.
LUMBER FOR FORMS.
8 pieces 1 by 12 inches by T4 feet long.
- 13 pieces 1 by 12 inches by 12 feet long.
2 pieces 1 by 12 inches by 9 feet long.
2 pieces 1 by 12 inches by 6 feet long.
2 pieces 1 by 12 inches by 4 feet long.
8 pieces 2 by 4 inches by 8 feet long.
-^2 pieces 2 by 4 inches by 7 feet long.
2 pieces 2 by 4 inches by 6 feet long.
2 pieces 2 by 4 inches by 4 feet long.
2 pieces 2 by 4 inches by 2 feet long.
7 pieces 1 by 6 inches by 12 feet long for crosspieces for inside of forms.
LUMBER FOR DRIPPING PEN.
7 pieces 6 by 6 inches by 10 feet long for posts.
10 pieces 1 by 8 inches by 16 feet long for side rails of pen.
5 pieces 1 by 8 inches by 12 feet long for side rails of pen.
5 pieces 1 by 8 inches by 8 feet long for side rails of pen.
The covers can be made from the lumber used in making the forms,
and the lumber for the exit incline can be gotten in the same way.
The 4 by 4 inch posts to which the cover is hinged may be made
from 2 by 4 stuff by spiking together.
End form to be made solid.
HARDWARE AND IRONWORK.
6 bolts, § by 10 inches, with nuts and washers, for false floor of incline.
1 sheet of i-inch boiler iron cut to shape of slide; plate bored and counter-
sunk for 4 screws.
4 pairs hinges for covers.
3 heavy T hinges and screws for gate of dripping pen.
1 heavy iron bolt to fasten gate.
18 BIPS AND DIPPING VATS FOR DESTROYING CATTLE TICTKS.
CONCRETE.
VAT.
Cement, 10£ barrels (42 bags).
Sand, 3f cubic yards.
Stone, 6i eubic yards.
DRIPPING PEN AND CHUTE.
Cenrent, 5^ barrels (22 bags).
SandT If cubic yards.
Stone, 3£ cubic yards.
A 26-foot vat has been used extensively for eradication purposes
with satisfactory results. However, if it is desired to lengthen the
body of the vat on account of large numbers of cattle to be treated, or
to make it conform to the bureau's requirements for the treatment of
cattle for movement as noninfectious, there should be added to the
amount of concrete material for each lineal or running foot, cement,
0.37 barrel; sand, 0.12 yard; stone, 0.24 yard.
By some a dripping chute is regarded more satisfactory than a
dripping pen. One of the advantages that it has is that the cattle
are held in line in the order in which they have been dipped, thus
making it possible to remove one or more of them at a time as soon
as they have drained sufficiently, in order to make room for others.
In using the dripping pen this is not practicable, and it is necessary
to wait until the last animal dipped has drained sufficiently and
then remove them all together.
In case it is desired to construct a dripping chute it should be
located at the head of the exit incline in line with the vat. It should
be about 36 inches wide. The length will depend on the number of
cattle it is desired to accommodate at one time, it being necessary to
allow 4 to 5 feet for each. A length of from 20 to 40 feet is con-
sidered a convenient size for small herds. The floor should be made
of concrete and sloped toward the vat. The dip should not be per-
mitted to run directly into the vat, but should be collected in a barrel
to settle, as shown in the case of the dripping pen. The floor at the
sides should be raised about 2 inches in the form of a curb to keep the
dip from running off.
SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF A BRICK DIPPING
VAT.
MATERIALS.
Bricks.—All bricks should be hard burned.
Mortar,—The mortar used in laying the bricks should be composed
of 1 part of Portland cement and 3 parts of clean, sharp sand. The
plaster for facing the inside of the vat should consist of 1 part of
cement and 2 parts of sand.
I
C/?OSS SECT/OM
-**** -e'-o'~ ^/f*m
.*W <fi"x«t"
61
I
o
a
FIG. 2.—Plan for a brick dripping vat.
20 DIPS AND DIPPING VATS FOR DESTROYING CATTLE TICKS.
EXCAVATION AND CONSTRUCTION.
Excavate the ground 1 inch wider than the outside width of the
vat. Lay up the walls one brick thick, all bricks to be stretchers; that
is, the long way of the brick to be laid the long way of the wall.
The sides are to be laid with level courses and the batter or slant is
; made by setting back each succeeding layer of bricks. Break joints
in every course. Rake out the horizontal mortar joints at least £ inch
from the inside face of the wall. This will give a key for the cement-
mortar facing. Build buttresses or piers where indicated on plan and
shown on cross section. (See fig. 2.) The buttresses are to be one
brick wide at the bottom and to extend far enough from the inside
face of the vat so that the outside face will be plumb and finish even
with the outside face of the coping or curb at top of vat. The but-
tresses should be laid as a part of the wall and should be bonded into
the wall. The bottom is laid after the walls are up and the bricks are
laid flat. The exit incline is laid with bricks laid on edge, and every
fifth course is to project 2 inches above the face of the incline to form
cleats. The mortar between the ends of the bricks which form the
cleats should be cleaned out in order to permit the dip to run back.
In laying up the walls fill in with mortar between the dirt and out-
side face of wall.
The side walls above the ground may be finished and beveled by
using a heavy coating of cement mortar, or the top may be finished by
laying the last twTo courses of bricks on edge and so that the bricks are
headers; that is, the bricks are laid at right angles to the face of the
wall. Cover the inside faces of walls, exit incline, floor, and slide
with a J-inch coat of cement mortar mixed in the proportion of 1
part of cement to 2 parts of sand. Trowel the surface with a steel
trowel to make smooth.
The dripping pen and the chute are to be floored with bricks. If
the ground is very firm, the bricks may be laid flat, but if the ground
is not firm a more satisfactory floor will be produced by laying the
bricks on edge. The bricks should be laid in a bed of cement and the
joints grouted with cement grout. Cement grout is made by mixing
neat cement with water until it has the thickness of cream. Before
any of the brickwork is coated with mortar the bricks should be thor-
oughly washed, and they should be thoroughly wet before the plaster
coat is applied. The dripping pen and chute are to be plastered with
a |-inch coat of cement mortar, and before it is completely set the sur-
face is to be rubbed with a brush broom or a heavy stable broom.
BILL OF MATERIALS FOR BRICK VAT, DRIPPING PEN, AND CHUTE.
Brick for vat 2,560
_ .. _ „ _ . . • . . rif laid on edge 1,320
Brick for dripping pen and chute |.f ^ ^ ^
Cement sacks— 28
Sand (for mortar) cubic yards__ 1.6
o