 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Historic, archived document 
  
Do not assume content reflects current 
scientific knowledge, policies, or practices. 
 
Issued December 11,1911.
U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
BUREAU OP ANIMAL INDUSTRY.—CIRCULAR 183.
A. D. MELVIN, CHIEF OF BUREAU. •
DIRECTIONS FOR CONSTRUCTING A V
CATTLE TO DESTROY TIC
BY
H. W. GRAYBILL, D. V. M,,
Assistant Zoologist^ Zoological Division^
AND
W. P. ELLENBERGER, D. V. S.,
Veterinary Inspector^ Inspection Division,
WASHINGTON:
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE.
1911.
THE BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY.
Chief: A. D. MELVIN.
Assistant Chief: A. M. FARRINGTON.
Chief Clerk: CHARLES C. CARROLL.
Animal Husbandry Division: GEORGE M. ROMMEL, chief.
Biochemic Division: M. DORSET, chief.
Dairy Division: B. H. RAWL, chief.
Inspection Division: RICE P. STEDDOM, chief; MORRIS WOODEN, R. A. RAMSAY,
and ALBERT E. BEHNKE, associate chiefs.
Pathological Division: JOHN R. MOHLER, chief.
Quarantine Division: RICHARD W. HICKMAN, chief.
Zoological Division: B. H. RANSOM, chief.
Experiment Station: E. C. SCHROEDER, superintendent.
Editor: JAMES M. PICKENS.
2
LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL.
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUL/TURE,
BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY,
Washington, D. C, September 18, 1911.
SIR : I have the honor to transmit the accompanying paper entitled
" Directions for Constructing a Vat and Dipping Cattle to Destroy
Ticks," by Drs. H. W. Graybill and W. P. Ellenberger, of this
bureau. This circular not only gives directions for preparing arseni-
cal dips and for dipping cattle, but contains plans and specifications
for the construction of a suitable dipping vat. It has been pre-
pared to meet the need for such information in connection with the
work being done by the bureau in cooperation with State and local
authorities for the eradication of the ticks which spread the con-
tagion of Texas or southern cattle fever. I respectfully recommend
that it be published in the circular series of this bureau.
Kespectfully,
A. D. MELVIN,
Chief of Bureau.
Hon. JAMES WILSON,
Secretary of Agriculture.
3
14556°—Cir. 183.
CONTENTS.
Page.
Arsenical dips : - 5
Preparation and use of arsenical dips 5
Precautions in the use of arsenic . - 8
Method of dipping 9
Specifications for the construction of a concrete cattle-dipping vat 10
Site .... 10
Excavation .... 10
Forms 12
Concrete.... 12
Waterproofing 13
Exit incline 13
Slide.. 13
Cover 14
Dripping pen 14
Chute. 14
Bill of materials for vat, dripping pen, and chute 14
ILLUSTRATION.
FIG. 1. Plans for a concrete dipping vat 11
4
DIRECTIONS FOR CONSTRUCTING A VAT AND DIPPING
CATTLE TO DESTROY TICKS.
In fhe course.of the work of tick eradication, which the Bureau of
Animal Industry has undertaken in cooperation with the States of
the quarantined area> there has arisen a demand for a brief publica-
tion treating of the preparation and use of arsenical dips and giving
plans and specifications for a dipping vat suited to the conditions
and requirements on the ordinary farm.1 It is with €Iie view of
supplying this information that the present circular has been pre-
pared. Those who may desire information on the life history of
the tick or further information relating to methods of* its eradication
are referred fo more extensive publications on those subjects.2
ARSENICAL DIPS.
Arsenical dips as ageiits for destroying cattle ticks have come into
much favor during the past few years. This has been due to their
efficacy, cheapness, the ease with which they are prepared, tod the
comparatively slight injury they cause to cattle when properly pre-
pared and used. Homemade dips are the ones most commonly used
and are quite satisfactory in every way when ordinary care is used in
their preparation. Recently there has been placed on the market a
proprietary concentrated arsenical dip which has given good results.
This dip is prepared for use by diluting it with cold water in the
proportions of 1 to 100. The only advantage in such a dip is that
comparatively little time is required in preparing the bath, but this
advantage is largely counterbalanced by the fact that it is more
expensive than a homemade dip.
PREPARATION AND USE OF ARSENICAL DIPS.
The formula most commonly used in making an arsenical dip is
the fbll&Wing:
Sodium carbonate (sal soda) pounds 24
Arfc^c tri6Xid (wnlte arsenic) do 8
Pine tar ; gallon__ %
Water sufficient to make 500 gallons.
1 In preparing the plans of the vat shown Irl this circular consideration has been giVen
to. thS question of cost as well as to practicability of design. The plans for a vat that
has been used extensively and with much success by bureau inspectors in the tick eradi-
cation worfc In Alabama have be'en followed in part.
«Farmers' Bulletin 378, Bureau of Animal Industry Bulletin 130, and Bureau of
Entomology Bulletin 72, all issued by the United States Department of Agriculture.
5
6 DIPPING CATTLE TO DESTKOY TICKS.
If for any reason a stronger dip is desired, 25 pounds of sodium
carbonate and 10 pounds of arsenic trioxid may be used in place of
the amounts given in the above formula. The stronger dip is re-
quired by the regulations of the Bureau of Animal Industry in the
dipping of cattle which are to enter interstate commerce from quar-
antined areas, but for ordinary eradication work when immediate
removal of the cattle to tick-free areas is not contemplated it will
probably be best to use the weaker solution, and this is especially
true during hot weather and when the animals are to be treated
every two weeks.
In preparing the dip a large caldron or galvanized tank is required
for heating the water in which to dissolve the chemicals. Thirty
or forty gallons of water should be placed in the caldron or tank
and brought to a boil. The amount of sodium carbonate indicated
in the formula is then added and dissolved by stirring. When this
is accomplished, the required amount of arsenic is added and dis-
solved in a similar manner. The fire is then drawn, and the solution
permitted to cool to 140° F., or this process may be hastened by the
addition of cold water. The pine tar is then added slowly in a thin
stream and thoroughly mixed with the solution by constant stirring.
' This solution is diluted to 500 gallons before using.
If a larger caldron or tank is available for preparing the dip, a
greater quantity of solution may be prepared at one time, always,
of course, in the same proportion as the above. In this way the time
required in preparing the amount of solution necessary to fill a vat
is reduced considerably. In case it is necessary to use a smaller con-
tainer, say of about the capacity of 25 gallons, only half the amount
of solution indicated should be prepared at one time, the quantities
of ingredients used being half those in the formula. This will,
however, require so much time in preparing the amount of solution
necessary to fill a vat that when possible it is advisable to provide
a larger vessel for dissolving the chemicals.
The caldron or tank and utensils used in preparing the dip should
be kept free from grease or oil, as small quantities of these may
envelop particles of arsenic and prevent or hinder the solution of
the arsenic. It should also be borne in mind that when hard water
is used in the preparation of the dip the dissolving of the sodium
carbonate (sal soda) in the boiling water results in the formation of
a fine white or gray insoluble powder or precipitate of lime salts
which may be taken for undissolved arsenic, and thus lead to the
belief that all of the arsenic has not gone into solution.
The arsenical solution may be poured into the vat as rapidly as
it is prepared until the amount required to fill the vat, when prop-
erly diluted, has been made. The most convenient way of diluting
the solution is to run the water into the vat through a hose or pipe.
DIPPING CATTLE TO DESTROY TICKS. 7
The capacity of the vat at the depth to which it is necessary to fill
it for dipping, if not known, should be calculated, and for future con-
venience the water line should be plainly marked at some point on
the wall of the vat. After the exact amount of solution necessary
to furnish diluted dip to,fill the vat has been prepared and placed
in the vat all that is necessary is to allow water to flow into the
vat until the surface of the dip reaches the mark made on the side
of the vat. For example, if the capacity of the vat is 2,000 gallons,
then four times the amount of solution necessary to make 500 gallons
of dip should be prepared, placed in the vat, and the latter filled with
water to the 2,000-gallon mark. In case the vat leaks it will be
necessary to modify the above procedure by placing the concentrated
arsenical solution necessary to fill the vat in barrels and only plac-
ing it in the vat when the latter is nearly filled with water, being
careful to note, however, that there is ample capacity remaining so
that when the solution in the barrel is added the dip surface will not
be above the mark to which the vat is to be filled.
The capacity of the vat planned in this circular at a depth of 5
feet 3 inches is 1,470 gallons. In order to fill it to that depth with
dip it will be necessary to prepare two batches of concentrated dip
each containing the ingredients necessary for making 500 gallons of
diluted dip and a third batch containing 7 pounds 9 ounces of arsenic
and 22 pounds 3 ounces of sodium carbonate in case 8 pounds of
arsenic are being used to the 500 gallons, or 9 pounds 7 ounces of
arsenic and 22 pounds 8 ounces of sodium carbonate in case 10 pounds
of arsenic are being used to the 500 gallons.
When for any reason it is not convenient to follow the above
method of diluting the dip, a stock solution may be prepared in which
the quantity of ingredients for 500 gallons of diluted dip are dis-
solved in 50 gallons of water. Nine parts of water to 1 part of this
stock solution will then give the proper dilution. The stock solution
is found very convenient for replenishing the dip in a vat when it
has become too low for dipping. A stock solution should not be
made in more concentrated form than that given (50 gallons of stock
for, 500 gallons of dip), as the pine tar does not remain properly
mixed when the solution is too concentrated.
The arsenical dip may be left in the vat and used repeatedly, re-
plenishing it with the proper quantities of water and stock solution
when necessary. When, however, the dip becomes filthy through the
addition of manure and dirt carried in by the cattle, the vat should
be emptied, cleaned, and filled with fresh fluid. The frequency with
which this should be done must be left to the owner, as the condition
of the dip at any period after it has been made depends on a variety
of conditions, such as the number of cattle dipped, the frequency of
the dippings, etc. Even though the dip may not become very .filthy,
8 DIPPING CATTLE TO DBSTEOY TICKS.
it& efficacy decreases somewhat on standing, owing to gradual oxida-
tion of rite ri^fcenic. It is therefore advisable to Ffceharge the va* if
the d&p ife ttubte than a ntonth or six: weeks old irrespective of its con-
dition as to cleanliness.
At the conclusion of each dipping it is well to mark the position
of the stlrfa^ of the dip on the side of the vat ill oi^der to determine
at the next dipping whether there has been a change in the lervel of
the dip* If the surface of the dip has fallen atid it is known that the
vat does not leakj there has beeii a loss of water by evaporation and
consequently an increase in the strength of the dip. In order to bring
the dip down to its former strength water should be run into the vat
until th^ dip surface reaches the mark made at the last dippiiig. If
the fell has been due to the vat leaking, the strength of the dip has
not beeii altered and consequently water alone should not be added.
IfthG dip stirf&ce has been raised by rain the amount of Water added
in this way should be determined by calculation, and for1 every nine
gallons of water one gallon of the stock solution previously mentioned
should be used.
When not in use the vat should be tightly covered with a water-
proof cover to prevent evaporation on the one hand and further
dilution by rain oft the other hand. Securely covering the vat when
not in use also lessens the risk of accidental poisoning of stock &iid
human beings.
PRECAUTIONS IN THE USE OF ARSENIC.
On account of the fact that arsenic id a dangerous poison, great care
must be dbserved in making and Using the arsenical dip. From the time
the arsenic is procured frbm the druggist until the l&St particle Of unused
residue is ]Jrffperly disposed of, the most seruptildus care should be taken
in handling it. Guessing at weights or measures of carelessness itt any
particular is liable to result itt great damage, and not Only may valuable
live stock be destroyed, but human beings nifty lose their lives as Well.
Persons using the dijj should bear in mind the possibility of absorbing
arsenic through cuts, scrambles, or abrasions <rf the sMn and alsd by
inhalation of vapors from the boiler in which the dip is prepared, ft
should be remembered that the absorption of even very small quantifies
of arsenic, if repeated from d&y td day, is liable Ultimately f6 resttit in
arsenical poisoning.
Cattle should always be watered a short time before they are dipped.
After they emerge from the vat they should be ke$t on a draining ftbor
until the dip ceases to run from their bodies; then they should be placed
in a yard free of vegetation until they are entirely dry. If cattle are
allowed to drain in places where pools of dip collect, from which they may
drink, or are turned at once on the pasture, where the dip will run from
their bodies on the grass and other vegetation, serious losses are liable
DIPPING CATTLE i6 DESTROY TICKS. 9
to r&nri*. GtaWding the aniitftls before they tire dty should also bt
at^Mefl, tod ffi(6$r ditenl* ifttt W driven atiy oonsid^table di^tftucel
a #«* ««* dicing, especially in hot leather. If mafly
trfctftfttfclft are five* the cattle shotild not be treated oftener than
In addition to properly ^rot6cting vats containing arsenical dip
not HI Tise, another precaution must be observed when tats are to be
emptied for cleaning. The dip should not be poured or allowed to flow
on land aid vegetation to which cattle or other animals have access.
The best plan is to run the dip into a pit property p*6te£te& by fetifces,
and ti& dip should not be deposited where it may be oarrled by seepage
into wfelfc Or springs whioh supply water used on tie farm.
The above precautions ate given to inform persons not familiar
with attstoic of its poisonous nature and the care that should be ob-
serVed in its use, and to stimulate a proper care ki those who know
ite ]ft>iso!riotis liature and yet might be careless or who may not know
all the precautions that should be observed. Unfortunately, how-
ever, the giving and emphasizing of such precautions have had the
-effebfc of arousing unwarranted fear of arsenic oil the part of eoihe
stbok&ien arid farmers, and have caused them, for a time sit least, to
refuM to uitttetftake its use in treating cattle for ticks. For the bene-
fit of those who may ilnduly fear arsenic because of what has been
saidj it &hotild bG stated that when reasonable care is observed in fol-
lowing the precautions given there is little danger of losses occurring.
The arsenical dip has been extensively used during the past five
years in tick-eradication work in the tick-infested area, and consider-
ing the number of cattle that have been dipped the losses have been
very small. Some of these losses have been definitely traced to care-
lessness, and there is little doubt that if it had been possible to in-
vg&fcigate all losses the majority of them would have beett fotlnd to
be d«e to this cause.
METHOD OF DIPPING.
The procedure to be followed in dipping animals on a farm de-
pends on the end that is sought in undertaking the treatment. If it
is simply desired to reduce and keep down the infestation of ticks on
a farm, it will only be necessary for the owner to keep his animals
under observation and dip them when, according to his judgment,
treatment is necessary to keep the ticks under control. Such a pro-
cedure may well be followed where the regular tick eradication is not
under way; that is, in instances in which it is not yet practicable or
expedient to rid farms completely of ticks.
If, however, it is desired to rid the farm completely of ticks—and
this should be the purpose in every case in which it is practicable and
expedient—it will be necessary to dip all cattle, and also any horses,
10 VAT FOB DIPPING CATTLE TO DESTROY TICKS.
mules, or asses that may harbor the cattle tick, at regular intervals
until all ticks have disappeared from the farm. The purpose of such
dipping is to prevent as nearly as possible any engorged females drop-
ping to the pasture and there laying eggs which in time may develop
into young ticks. In order to do this it is necessary to dip at inter-
vals short enough so that no tick after getting on the cattle will have
time to mature and drop off before the next dipping. An interval
between dippings of two weeks is considered most satisfactory. This
interval, however, may be increased somewhat if necessary, but it
should never be greater than three weeks.
In freeing a farm of ticks the dipping should not be discontinued
until it has been determined with certainty that the cattle and prem-
ises are free of ticks. It should be borne in mind that it is almost
impossible to determine by a few inspections, even if carried out with
great care, that animals are free from ticks. If the treatment is dis-
continued and a few unobserved ticks are still on the animals, these,
on maturing and dropping, are likely to give rise to a new brood of
young ticks. Moreover, even if the cattle are actually free from ticks,
the fact should not be lost sight of that there may still be engorged
females, eggs, and seed ticks on the premises. This is most likely to
be the case during the colder part of the year when the development
of the tick on the ground progresses slowly and also when any seed
ticks that may be present are likely to be slow in reaching the cattle
because of inactivity resulting from the low temperature.
SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF A CONCRETE
CATTLE-DIPPING VAT.
SITE.
The site selected for the location of the vat should be dry and of
sufficient size to admit of the construction of the chute, the dripping
pen, and at least two additional pens—one for holding the cattle
prior to dipping and the other for retaining them after dipping
until sufficiently dried.
EXCAVATION.
The excavation should be made 1 foot wider and 1 foot longer
than the inside dimensions of the vat and should conform, to its
shape. The inside dimensions of the vat are shown on the drawings
(fig. 1) and are as follows: Length at top of vat, 26 feet; bottom, 12
feet. Width at top, 3 feet; at bottom, 1\ feet. Depth, 6£ feet.
The sides and bottom of the excavation should be firm and solid,
as they are to serve for the outside forms in casting the concrete.
If it is necessary to do any filling in order to conform to the shape
of the vat, the filling should be puddled and thoroughly rammed
until solid, because the stability of the concrete depends on the
foundation.
VAT FOB DIPPING CATTLE TO DESTROY TICKS. 11
\
t
12 VAT FOB DIPPING CATTLE TO DESTROY TICKS*
FORMS.
The wooden forms should be constructed of 1-inch boards a,nd 2 by
4 inch braces, the boards being nailed to the outside face of the braces,
as shown in the drawings. The sides and end walls should be built 8
inches higher thaji the surface of the ground, which should be level.
CONCRETE.
The concrete should be made of 1 part of cement, by measure, ty
parts of sand, and 5 parts of broken rock or gravel. The cement
should be of a standard brand of Portland, the sand clean and coarse,
and the broken rock from about £-inch pieces to not larger than will
pass in every direction through a 1-inch ring.
Mixing.—The mixing should be done on a tight wooden platform
or in a tight box. The sand and stone should be measured in a bot-
tomless box, 2J feet long by 2 feet wide by 1 foot deep, having a
capacity of 5 cubic feet. A convenient size of batch to mix is ohe con-
sisting of 2 bags of cement, 1 measure (5 cubic feet) of sand, a*nd 2
measures (10 cubic feet) of stone.
The sand is measured out first and the cement emptied oil top, after
which the two materials are thoroughly mixed together, dry. In the
meantime the stone may be measured out and thoroughly drenched
with water. The cement-sand mixture is mixed with water and the
resulting mortar then combined with the stone. The stone should be
shoveled on the mortar, which has been previously spread out in a
thin layer. Mixing should continue until the stone is thoroughly
coated with mortar, more water being added during the mixing
process if necessary.
Laying.—Before laying the concrete the molds should be set and
thoroughly braced into place. The side forms may be suspended in
the excavation with their lower edges 6 inches from the bottom by
means of crosspieces nailed to the uprights and of sufficient length
to rest on supports located several feet from the edges of the excava-
tion. The concrete for the bottom and incline is deposited first,
this mixture being of a consistency that water will flush to the sur-
face on ramming. The mixtures for the sides and end should be
very wet and should be thoroughly puddled into place. The con-
sistency of the concrete for the side walls should be such that it will
run off the shovel unless handled quickly.
The laying of the concrete should be done, if possible, in one opera-
tion, in order that there may be no joints between the new and old
work. If it becomes necessary to lay the concrete on two or more
days the surface on which the new concrete is to be deposited should
be washed thoroughly clean and coated with grout of pure Portland
cement and water mixed to the consistency of cream. The new con-
VAT FOB DIPPING CATTLE TO DESTROY TICKS. 18
crete should be placed before the grout has set. Extreme care should
be taken to prevent dirt from falling in on top of the deposited
co$crete.
The forms should jiot be reinoved until the concrete is set, which
in jnodprate weather will have taken place in about 24 hours. In
damp, cold weather at least 48 hours should be allowed before remov-
ing the forms. It will be advisable, especially in water-soaked
ground, to allow the forms to remain in place for one week before
removal.
Finishing coat.—Before applying the surface coat dampen the walls
and floor thoroughly. Cover the entire exposed surface of the floor
and walls with a coating one-half inch thick of cement mortar com-
posed of Portland cement 1 part, sand 2 parts. Coating to be floated
and troweled to a smooth finish.
WATERPROOFING.
If the e^rth around the vat is thoroughly drained the vat may be
waterproofed by painting the surface coat, but painting the surface
will not give satisfactory results if there is ground water to seep in.
The paint may be good hot pine tar, or gas-house tar cut with naphtha
or gasoline and applied with a brush, or after the mortar coat has
hardened the inside of the vat may be painted with' an oil-cement
* paint made as follows:1 Mix enough water with Portland cement to
make a fairly stiff paste; add to this 5 per cent of heavy petroleum
residuum pil based on the weight of the cement, and mix thoroughly
until the oil entirely disappears, then add more water and stir until
a paint of the consistency of cream is formed. This paint should be
applied with a brush and should be well rubbed into the surface.
Should the mortar coat be omitted the paint coat should be applied
directly to the surface of the concrete.
EXIT INCLINE.
As the exit incline is to have a false wooden floor, it will be necessary
to embed iron bolts in the concrete, to which the wooden floor may be
fastened. Before the concrete incline is laid embed in the dirt three
pieces of 2 by 4 inch scantling, placed at the top, center, and bottom
of the incline. The bolts should extend through these pieces and
should be placed with the head next to the dirt. The bolts should be
long enough to extend through the concrete and the inch boards of
the floor, so that the wooden floor may be securely fastened.
SLIDE.
Cover the slide jyith fi sheet of boiler iron properly fastened t& the
cement.
1 These directions for tl^e oil-cement paint are furnished by the Office of Public Roads
of the tfnited States Department of Agriculture.
14 VAT FOE DIPPING CATTLE TO DESTROY TCOKS.
COVER.
The cover of the vat consists of two leaves hinged on posts set 3
feet in the ground along each side of the vat. The leaves are 2 feet
6 inches wide, and when open rest against the upper part of the
posts to which they are hinged and serve as splash boards. The
details of the hinge1 used and the method of setting it are shown
in the drawings. When the leaves are open their lower edges are
just above the top of the side walls, which are given a slope inward
for the purpose of conducting the dip running from the splash
boards back into the vat. Removable doors should be constructed to
close the triangular openings left at the ends of the vat when the
. cover is closed. The hinges may be made by a blacksmith.
DRIPPING PEN.
Construct a dripping pen about 12 by 15 feet at the head of the
exit incline. The floor should be of concrete prepared as previously
described for the vat and laid in a similar manner. The floor should
be pitched toward a corner of the pen, where a pipe should be laid
in the floor to carry the drippings into a barrel sunk in the ground.
The drippings thus caught may be returned to the vat after settling.
The floor should be roughened to prevent the cattle from slipping.
CHUTE.
The chute leading to the vat should be built 30 inches wide and 20
feet long, and the receiving and retaining pens should be of a size to
take care of the animals to be dipped.
BILL OF MATERIALS FOR VAT, DRIPPING PEN, AND CHUTE.
LUMBER FOR FORMS.
8 pieces 1 by 12 inches by 14 feet long.
13 pieces 1 by 12 inches by 12 feet long.
2 pieces 1 by 12 inches by 9 feet long.
2 pieces 1 by 12 inches by 6 feet long.
2 pieces 1 by 12 inches by 4 feet long.
8 pieces 2 by 4 inches by 8 feet long.
2 pieces 2 by 4 inches by 7 feet long.
2 pieces 2 by 4 inches by 6 feet long.
2 pieces 2 by 4 inches by 4 feet long.
2 pieces 2 by 4 inches by 2 feet long.
7 pieces 1 by 6 inches by 12 feet long for crosspieces for inside of forms.
LUMBER FOR DRIPPING PEN.
7 pieces 6 by 6 inches by 10 feet long for posts.
10 pieces 1 by 8 inches by 16 feet long for side rails of pen.
5 pieces 1 by 8 inches by 12 feet long for side rails of pen.
5 pieces 1 by 8 inches by 8 feet long for side rails of pen.
1 This hinge and the method of setting it for the cover of a dipping vat have been
copied from an article by William Taylor Heslop in the Agricultural Journal of the Union
•of South Africa, Pretoria, vol. 1, No. 1, 1911, pp. 38-43.
VAT FOB DIPPING CATTLE TO DESTROY TICKS. 15
The covers can be made from the lumber used in making the forms,
and the lumber for the exit incline can be gotten in the same way.
The 4 by 4 inch posts to which the cover is hinged may be made
from 2 by 4 stuff by spiking together.
End form to be made solid.
HARDWARE AND IRONWORK.
6 bolts, i by 10 inches, with nuts and washers, for false floor of incline.
1 sheet of i-inch boiler iron cut to shape of slide; plate bored and counter-
sunk for four screws.
4 pairs hinges for covers.
3 heavy T hinges and screws for gate of dripping pen.
# 1 heavy iron bolt to fasten gate.
CONCRETE.
VAT,
Cement, 10* barrels (42 bags).
Sand, 3£ cubic yards.
Stone, 6i cubic yards.
DRIPPING PEN AND CHUTE.
Cement, 5* barrels (22 bags).
Sand, If cubic yards.
Stone, 3* cubic yards.
A 26-foot vat has been used extensively for eradication purposes
with satisfactory results. However, if it is desired to lengthen the
body of the vat on account of large numbers of cattle to be treated, or
to make it conform to the bureau's requirements for the treatment of
cattle for movement as noninfectious, there should be added to the
amount of concrete material for each lineal or running foot, cement,
0.37 barrel; sand, 0.12 yard; stone, 0.24 yard.
By some a dripping chute is regarded more satisfactory than a
dripping pen. One of the advantages that it has is that the cattle
are held in line in the order in which they have been dipped, thus
making it possible to remove one or more of them at a time as soon
as they have drained sufficiently, in order to make room for others.
In using the dripping pen this is not practicable and it is necessary
to wait until the last animal dipped has drained sufficiently and
then remove them all together.
In case it is desired to construct a dripping chute it should be
located at the head of the exit incline in line with the vat. It should
be about 36 inches wide. The length will depend on the number of
cattle it is desired to accommodate at one time, it being necessary to
allow 4 to 5 feet for each. A length of from 20 to 40 feet is con-
sidered a convenient size for small herds. The floor should be made
of concrete and sloped toward the vat. The dip should not be per-
mitted to run directly into the vat, but should be collected in a barrel
to settle, as shown in the case of the dripping pen. The floor at the
sides should be raised about 2 inches in the form of a curb to keep the
dip from running off.
o