U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY.—
A. D. MELVIN, CHIEF OF BUREAU.
ERADICATING CATTLE
CALIFORNIA.
BY
WILLIAM M. MACKELLAR,
Veterinary Inspector in Charge,
AND
GEORGE H. HART,
Assistant in Pathology and Bacteriology.
[Reprinted from the Twenty-sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of Animal Industry (1909).]
WASHINGTON:
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE.
1911.
ORGANIZATION OF THE BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY.
Chief: A. D. MELVIN.
Assistant Chief: A. M. FARBINGTON.
Chief Clerk: CHARLES C. CARROLL.
Animal Husbandry Division: GEORGE M. ROMMEL, chief.
Biochemic Division: M. DORSET, chief.
Dairy Division: B. H. RAWL, chief.
Inspection Division: RICE P. STEDDOM, chief; MORRIS WOODEN, R. A. RAMSAY, and
ALBERT E. BEHNKE, associate chiefs.
Pathological Division: JOHN R. MOHLER, chief.
Quarantine Division: RICHARD W. HICKMAN, chief.
Zoological Division: B. H. RANSOM, chief.
Experiment Station: E. C. SCHROEDER, superintendent.
J&ditor: JAMES M. PICKENS.
CONTENTS.
Page.
Conditions prior to commencement of eradication work 283
Losses from the ticks 285
Early methods of combating gross infestation 286
Importance of State law 287
Methods used in tick eradication in California 288
International fence 290
Dipping solution, its preparation and use 291
The dipping vats found most practicable 293
The swim vat 293
The cage vat 297
The wade tank 299
Present conditions in California 300
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Page.
PLATE XV. Cage vat for dipping cattle 296
FIG. 7. Plans for wood or concrete dipping vat 294
8. Plansforcage vat 297
9. Detail plans for cage vat 298
10. Plans for small wade tank 299
in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Historic, archived document 
  
Do not assume content reflects current 
scientific knowledge, policies, or practices. 
 
ERADICATING CATTLE TICKS IN CALIFORNIA.
By WILLIAM M. MACKELLAE, Veterinary Inspector in Charge,
AND
GEORGE H. HABT, Assistant in Pathology and Bacteriology.
CONDITIONS PRIOR TO COMMENCEMENT OP ERADICATION WORK
The history of the Texas-fever cattle tick in California covers
scores of years. On account of its dating back long before the tick
was known to be in any way connected with Texas fever, and at a
time when differentiation of infectious diseases of bovine animals
was little understood, resulting in anthrax, blackleg, and Texas fever
being confused with each other and all classed under the lay term of
" murrain," there is no way of ascertaining the exact origin of the
tick in this State.
The common wood tick and castor-bean tick are very numerous in
parts of California and are found on the cattle and horses in great
numbers at certain seasons of the year. It is natural, therefore, that
the invasion of the country by the deadly fever ticks attracted but
little attention for a long time after their appearance and until they
had secured a firm foothold.
Pioneer cattlemen of the State have different views as to the source
from which the fever ticks were introduced. Thus it is held by some
that they were brought across the Rocky Mountains on feeder cattle
shipped into this country from Texas. As Mexico, however, has
probably been infested since the early conquests of the Spanish, it is
most plausible to consider that California received her first Texas-
fever ticks from cattle driven across the line from Lower California.
Until recent years the entire country was open range and move-
ments of cattle were not controlled. The ticks, therefore, having been
seeded in this country, and attracting no suspicion from cattlemen,
had ample opportunity to spread and involve more of the southern
section of the State. In every infested locality some one cattleman,
who on account of having carried on the cattle business on a large
scale involving the shipping in of cattle from other sections of this
State and from other States, is accredited by his neighbors with the
ixesponsibility for bringing the ticks into that particular section.
283
284 26TH REPORT, BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY.
When the Texas-fever quarantine line was first placed across the
United States in 1891 as a result of investigations by Dr. D. E. Salmon,
the State of California was not included in the quarantined area. In
1894 outbreaks of Texas fever in Nevada, Kansas, and Missouri were
reported as apparently caused by cattle originating in California.
On account of these outbreaks of disease Mr. W. E. Hill, an inspector
of the Bureau of Animal Industry, was directed to proceed to Cali-
fornia and make an investigation. His investigation revealed that a
large part of this State was permanently infested with Texas-fever
ticks, and that great numbers of cattle had died of the disease in this
State. The limits of the infested area not having been definitely deter-
mined, the entire State was subsequently placed below the federal
quarantine line. Further investigation, however, having shown that
the northern part of the State was free of ticks, the line was gradually
moved south, so that in 1906 it crossed California at the northern
limits of San Luis Obispo,^ Fresno, Madera, and San Bernardino
counties, thus including the 13 southern counties of the State. All "of
the territory south of this line was not infested, on account of portions
of the country being unfavorable to the propagation of the ticks.
Although many of the counties in the quarantined territory had ap-
pointed live-stock inspectors, their duties involved attention to all
infectious diseases, and movements of cattle within a county were
without restriction. In this way all those sections favorable to the
development of ticks became permanently ticky ranges, although in
many instances they were separated by miles of mountainous desert,
or extremely dry lands, where, on account of lack of feed, cattle could
not remain the year round. Hence the ticks, even if well seeded on
this land, failed to secure a permanent foothold.
Cattlemen learned, even before ticks were in any way connected
with Texas fever, that certain ranges were dangerous for cattle, and
thus in many instances after the loss of nonimmune cattle that had
been placed on a ticky range this land was left free of cattle, and
the starvation method of cleaning the land of ticks was thereby un-
consciously accomplished. Thus areas within the State were con-
stantly being cleaned, while others, on account of the early-day prac-
tice of driving a herd of cattle away from a range on which they
were dying, became seeded. Such a condition of affairs existed when,
in July, 1906, under the congressional appropriation for tick eradi-
cation, the Bureau of Animal Industry started the work of eradicat-
ing the ticks in California in cooperation with the State officials.
The work at first consisted in locating the ticky ranches and edu-
cating the owners of such land to the losses they were sustaining
from the ticks and the benefits they would derive from eradicating
them. This required careful and repeated inspections of all the cattle
south of the quarantine line, and when completed showed San Luis
ERADICATING CATTLE TICKS IN CALIFORNIA. 285
Obispo, Santa Barbara, San Diego, Orange, Fresno, and Ventura
counties to be heavily infested, and Tulare, Kern, Kings, Los Angeles,
Riverside, San Bernardino, and Madera counties to be infested to a
lesser degree. These counties comprised 69,755 square miles of
territory, and contained 660,027 head of cattle, of which 153,476 were
on tick-infested ranges.
LOSSES FROM THE TICKS.
The loss to the cattle industry south of the quarantine line in Cali-
fornia from ticks has been enormous. This has been especially the
case in this State on account of the topography of the country. In
all the quarantined counties there is high mountainous land, or dry
land with very hot summers, where ticks do not thrive. As a result
there was constantly being raised, even in some very ticky counties,
thousands of head of cattle yearly that reached maturity without
ever becoming infested with ticks, and hence were not immune to
Texas fever. From adverse feed conditions, as cold in the mountains
or drought in the dry lands, cattle would from time to time be
brought to more favorable feeding places, usually along the coast,
which in the majority of cases were tick infested, and almost imme-
diately they would commence to die in wholesale numbers. The
mountain cattleman called the disease " coast fever," and from bitter
experience learned to leave their cattle in the mountains or dry
lands during adverse years, sustaining more or less heavy losses from
starvation, rather than bring them to the coast on good feed only to
stand much heavier losses from Texas fever.
Also, in the driving of cattle to favorable feeding places 50 to 100
miles distant, they would frequently be driven through some valley
in the mountains that was tick infested; and although perhaps only
remaining there overnight, in a short time afterwards, when miles
away from the ticky valley, the cattle would start to die, and losses
of from 50 to 100 head in this manner were not uncommon.
With the breaking up of many of the large ranges in California
the raising of cattle to the fattening stage early became cheaper in
the more remote States, as Arizona, Utah, Nevada, New Mexico, and
western Texas, which were free of ticks. Thus many feeders, all
nonimmunes, were annually shipped from these States to California
to be fattened on the native grasses. Such cattle, when brought to
ticky ranges in this State, died in such large numbers that the prac-
tice, while very profitable in the absence of ticks, had to be aban-
doned in many localities. Single cattlemen have been known to lose
an entire train load of such cattle in a short time.
Among the immune cattle raised on ticky ranges, toward the end
of the dry season, when feed was poor and ticks were so numerous as
286 26TH REPORT, BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY.
to " shingle " the cattle, a yearly loss ranging from 3 to 10 per cent
was sustained, while on all of these places since eradicating the
ticks this loss is entirely obviated.
On the grossly infested ranges it was sometimes necessary for stock
owners to get off their beef cattle before they were in prime condi-
tion, rather than keep them until later in the season, when, from the
heavy infestation, they would fall off instead of gain.
In some of the quarantined counties the trading in cattle became
so hazardous as to be almost abandoned, owners being afraid to buy
or move stock on account of great losses sustained by neighbors on
all sides from such a procedure.
In the counties where dairying is the main industry, the shrink-
age in milk production among the grossly infested herds during the
summer and fall, while hard to estimate accurately, would increase
the economic loss from the ticks to a considerable extent.
A great saving to the railroads in car disinfection has also been
accomplished, since a large part of the original area quarantined in
the State has been released.
EARLY METHODS OF COMBATING GROSS INFESTATION".
Prior to the commencement of the eradication work many ranges
containing fine feed were so heavily infested with ticks that raising
and fattening cattle on them was a difficult problem. The cattlemen
in many instances did not believe in the so-called tick theory of Texas
fever, but they considered that from their enormous numbers the
ticks were an injury on account of the parasitic existence they main-
tained on the cattle, which was constantly demonstrated by the large
percentage of deaths among immunes during times when feed was
short. It therefore was a general practice for ranchers in the summer
and fall to resort to various methods to destroy the ticks. The time
and labor expended in this procedure were great and their value
slight and of a very temporary duration. On some of the ranches the
range cattle were corraled, roped, and treated one at a time by hand,
either by currying off the ticks or applying various solutions, as crude
oil, coal-tar preparations, kerosene oil, or carbolic acid, which in all
cases killed only a portion of the ticks and often injured the hides of
the cattle more or less seriously. On the very large ranches, containing
many thousand head, treating all the cattle individually was impossi-
ble, and after corraling a bunch only those most heavily infested were
picked out for treatment. Even this absolutely ineffective method
required weeks of labor.
In other cases, wild cattle would be crowded into chutes and
sprayed through openings in the sides, by which method it was im-
possible to wet with the solution the parts of the animals where the
ticks were most numerous. In the dairy herds spraying and swab-
ERADICATING CATTLE TICKS IN CALIFORNIA. 287
bing were resorted tout irregular intervals. On some ranches chick-
ens were accredited with assisting in retarding tick development by
entering the corral and feeding on the adult ticks picked from the
bodies of cattle in the recumbent position.
On one large grant of land comprising 17,000 acres along the ocean
front, it was the custom to drive the cattle into the ocean and hold
them against the bluffs where the waves could beat against them.
This mechanical action of the waves had the effect of dislodging the
large ticks, and they dropped into the ocean, where they perished.
The measure, although very crude, was easy of accomplishment and
resulted in some benefit.
Owners of some of the larger ranches in order to combat ticks built
dipping vats. These they filled with water, on the surface of which
a thin float of oil or distillate was placed, in some cases not over one-
quarter to one-half inch thick. Cattle were rounded up and run
through such vats when the ticks became too numerous, but the per-
manent good so derived was slight.
IMPORTANCE OF STATE LAW.
On account of actual tick-eradication work being in no way con-
nected with the interstate movement of cattle, federal laws are in-
operative with regard to cattle kept within a State. It is therefore
essential that Bureau employees engaged in this work be deputized
under the state law so that they may carry out all the various pro-
visions of a practicable tick-eradication law.
While in all cases it expedites matters and is more pleasant for the
cattle owners and inspectors to work harmoniously in the eradication
of the ticks, a stringent state law is absolutely necessary, as there are
always a few stockmen who refuse to see the advantage to themselves
and the community in eradicating this pest. In order to compel such
indifferent owners to disinfect their cattle properly a state law should
be enacted giving the state authorities the power to enforce disinfec-
tion and making it a misdemeanor for the owners not to comply with
such requirements.
Through the efforts of the state veterinarian, Dr. Charles Keane.
the State of California, in March, 1907, enacted a law which makes it
a misdemeanor to move or expose tick-infested cattle in such a man-
ner as to infest other cattle or live stock not so infested. This law
also provides for the disinfection of cattle as directed by the state
veterinarian or his deputy, and provides that in case of failure on the
part of the owner so to disinfect, the state veterinarian has the
power to disinfect the cattle, the cost of the treatment becoming a
lien on them. This law, while having weak points that should be
corrected to cover certain special conditions, has been of inestimable
value in the work of tick eradication in California.
82882°—11 2
288 26TH REPORT, BtJREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY.
METHODS USED IN TICK EBADICATION IN CALIFORNIA-
On account of the present high valuation of range lands, the ab-
sence of feed-lot methods of fattening, and the stocking of all sec-
tions to the full capacity with live stock, the practice of " resting "
pastures to clean them is impracticable in the great majority of cases
in California. This method, however, is one which gives rapid re-
sults with little work, and when the number of cattle on the ranch
will permit of its use it is an easy method of accomplishing the
desired results. In this State it is recommended that all cattle, horses,
mules, and asses be excluded from the resting. pasture fdr gight
Dfconths, resting preferably to begin between Mky 1 and Octobefr 1,
When all tick eggs that may be oil the pasture are sui*e to hatch bef ore
the approach of cold weather.
From the lack of rains during the summer season and the excessive
valuation of irrigable lands, where forage crops could be raised for
use in the pasture-rotation method, this resource for ridding a ranch
of ticks has also been impracticable.
Tick eradication t&fcireferd TesolVed itself into a problem of clean-
ing the ranges while the cattle were constantly graiing upon them.
Under such conditions the first essential to success is tHfc installa-
tion of & dipping vat. It has been out experience under usual con-
ditions in this State that tiine used in spraying, smearing, carrying,
hand pidring, or other means without the dipping vat is mostly
wasted. These latter methods rimy be entirely successful with single
cows, but where there are a dozen head or more such measures require
two or three years, and before success is attained the owner is dis-
couraged and disgusted. Wheri the he!rd comprises over 50 head, it
h#$ in ottr experience, prbved to be practically iriipossiblib to clean
Withotat the vat.
After the vat is installed thte owner intrst be thoroughly informed at
the b^fimiing: what will be required of him to cl6an his rknch, and
ifc*pre«fee<L with the possibility of freeing His land and cattle in one
season. His cooperation is necessary, but even when this is grtan
constant supefrvisioli by the inspector is ttedessary to pi-fevfent laxity
a|id overlooking of details whidi are atrablutely essential to success.
TJms on a ranfch containing irifestjed cattle a single improper mixing
of the dipping sGlution or the failure to get a few head to the vat at
a dipping in the middle of the dipping season may destroy the oppor-
tenity of <$etfning the ranch with that year's work.
Although tjie eradication work in dn£ community has bedn very
successful and cleaning df the ranches has proceeded without inter-
*tfptK>n> thiB fact when iised as an argument for thorcrtigh and regular
dippirfg ii} scnother section often has little eflfect on obstinate owners
of tick-infested land.
ERADICATING CATTLE TICKS IN CALJFOBNIA. 28,9
g ^e process of cleaning, which entfils tipae, labor, &n<J px-
op ttf£ part of the cattleman, jie is a^nost sure to kecoine dis-
gd i}d yvhw, after having dipped his 9$ tyle three or four
times, they continue to comp up to the vat for the fourth or fifth
dippjiyj showing ticks, he commences to feel that his efforts are going
to be ip vaip. At this stage of eradication even the most enlightened
cattlemen Vho appreciate the benefit of exterminating the ticks are
liable to bpqoi^e so discouraged as to be disagreeable when approached
by the inspector in regard to further dipping. At this tune tact on
the part pf the inspector is very essential. Many cattlemen who have
made irritating and even insulting remarks tp the inspectors during
tfye time pf actual eradication work have, af^er this was completed
and when they realized that their ranches were free of the pest, l>e-
come strong in their praise of the work and the economic good it
has done them personally and will do the country at large.
During the dipping season, when the ranches are heavily infested,
horses, mules, and burros running on the range require attention,
and should be dipped or otherwise freed from ticks. When there is
slight infestation of the range, solipeds require little attention.
The dippings can be separated by intervals of thirty days under
ordinary circumstances when the infestation is slight or moderate.
When the range is very heavily infested it is better to dip at shorter
intervals, twenty-one to twenty-eight days, for several months or until
the ticks begin to show a reduction in numbers, when the intervals
between dippings may be extended to thirty days. When infested
cattle are to be moved to a tick-free pasture, two dippings must be
required, separated by an interval of five to fourteen days.
The dipping season in California begins about April 1 and must con-
tinue at thirty-day intervals until eight or nine dippings have been
made in order to clean the range in one season. During these eight
or nine months it is necessary for the inspector to be present at each
dipping and supervise the mixing of the dipping fluid in person.
He should know the exact number of cattle on each infested ranch,
and where possible should count the cattle at every dipping as they
are let out of the draining pen, to be sure that the owner has made a
clean roundup.
On the slight or moderately infested ranges after several dippings
the cattle will often come to the vat apparently free from ticks, and
the owner will therefore object to further dipping. In such cases
the absolute necessity for continuing the disinfection throughout the
season must be impressed upon him.
In many localities in California where infestation existed the coun-
try was divided up into small ranches, 40 to 120 acres. Such ranches
were separated by a single line of barbed-wire fence, and all con-
290 26TH REPORT, BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY.
tained cattle. Upon ranch-to-ranch inspection of such localities, in
many instances ranches would be found tick free when surrounding
them on one or more sides ticky cattle were known to be grazing.
Such ranches were kept under close observation throughout the
eradication work, and remained clean. It is thus seen that it is quite
practicable for a single line of good fence to prevent the spread of
the Texas-fever tick. As a result of our observations in this matter
it would seem to be unnecessary to augment the cost of eradication
by insisting on double division fences.
In dividing large ranges by cross fences, for the purpose of tick
eradication, as far as possible the single fence should be made to
traverse rough, inaccessible land where feed is short and where cattle
will consequently have little tendency to stray directly up to the
fence.
INTERNATIONAL FENCE.
Tick eradication along the California-Mexico line is complicated
by the fact that parts of Lower California, especially the coast sec-
tion, is heavily infested with ticks. It being largely a range country,
bady tick-infested live stock from that country were constantly drift-
ing and straying across the international line and undoing any efforts
of the American ranchers in this section to eradicate the ticks from
their land. Consequently it became apparent that if the ticks were
to be eradicated in this locality it would be necessary to control this
movement of tick-infested Mexican live stock. Without such con-
trol ranchers in this section consider it a hardship to have to attempt
to free their land of ticks, only to have it reinfested by stray Mexican
animals, and, consequently, their cooperation in the work can not be
secured.
The only feasible method of securing this control of live stock is
the construction of a stock-proof fence on or near the international
line. The necessity for such a fence has long been recognized by the
ranchers in this section, and some, to protect their feed and to assist
in freeing their cattle of ticks, have constructed fences of a more or
less temporary character at irregular intervals along the line; but in
most cases it has been necessary to abandon the eradication work in
this section pending the construction of a proper fence. It was soon
ascertained that such a fence could not be constructed without gov-
ernment assistance. The Bureau of Animal Industry has therefore
undertaken to construct a first-class stock-proof fence along this line,
wherever necessary, to prevent the entrance of infested Mexican live
stock. With this fence installed, eradication in this section will soon
be accomplished and future reinfestation, prevented. Such a fence
will also assist the customs officials in preventing illegal traffic be-
tween the two countries.
ERADICATING CATTLE TICKS IN CALIFORNIA. 291
DIPPING SOLUTION, ITS PREPARATION AND USE.
At the commencement of the work by the Bureau in the summer
and fall of 1906 the oil-float dip was used. This was prepared by
filling the vat with water, after which 1 to 2 inches of oil was floated
on the surface. The oil used was a California prodtict, and while
samples from several wells seemed to be nearly identical with Beau-
mont oil, injurious results to the cattle of a more or less serious nature
followed in most instances. This probably was largely due to the
extreme heat of California summers and the absence of shade on the
ranges. While ticks on the cattle were killed by this measure when
properly carried out, reinfestation soon occurred, and redippings at
sufficiently short intervals to prevent reseeding of the ranges was
impossible. The oil float having been found injurious, attempts to
use crude petroleum alone after the methods followed in the Eastern
States was abandoned. On account of the insurmountable opposition
on the part of the cattlemen to the use of oil, it soon became apparent
that tick eradication in this State would be impossible unless some
other less injurious disinfecting solution could be obtained.
The following year the arsenical solution was tried in several vats
with such satisfactory results to stock owners and inspectors that its
general use was at once inaugurated and has been continued unin-
terruptedly to the present time. In this solution, properly prepared,
cattle can be dipped nine or ten times in one season and remain in
as good if not better condition than cattle on adjoining pastures with
identical feed that have not been dipped.
The solution used in California is made after the following
formula:
Arsenic trioxid (white arsenic) pounds— 8
Sodium carbonate (sal soda) do 24
Soap (laundry or chipped) do 24
Pine tar gallons— 2 or 3
Water do 500
For mixing the preparation it is necessary to have at the vat one
or two caldrons or tanks of a capacity of not less than 50 gallons in
which to dissolve the ingredients. As the water in the caldron warms
the sodium carbonate is added and dissolved by stirring, after which
the arsenic is added and the fluid brought to the boiling point and
stirred until all is in solution. To expedite matters, the soap may
be cut up and heated at the same time in the second caldron or dis-
solved in the arsenic and soda solution when only one tank is avail-
able. These three ingredients being dissolved, the fire is then drawn,
and the tar is slowly added, with constant stirring to make a homo-
geneous solution. This concentrated solution is then added to the
292 26TH REPORT, BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY.
water in the vi|t to make the projier proportion, as giy^iv in the preced-
ing formula. When filling a large vat of a capacity of 3,000 or 4,000
gallons, several boilings have to be made, unless the cooking tank
is quite large.
The soap, in our opinion, is a valuable ingredient of the prepara-
tion. It gives body to the dip and tends to make it adhere to the
hides. This is important, as the solution acts as a gradual poison
to the ticks, requiring several days to kill when the parasites are
nearing maturity. It also cleans the hair of the cattle, thus improv-
ing their appearance after dipping, and may have a slight effect in
preventing reinfestation for a longer time than when they are dipped
in an arsenical solution without the soap. It also assists in eipulsify-
ing the tar and rendering the solution homogeneous. Thepe advan-
tages far outweigh the slight extra cost of its use. The addition of
the larger quantity (3 gallons, instead of 1 gallon, as usually recom-
mended) of pine tar is recommended, as it is also valuable in giving
body to the mixture and increases its action as a parasiticide. In ad-
dition, it has been found that the greater the proportion of tar the
longer cattlie are free from annoyance by flies following clipping.
While the solution made after the above formula is most satisfac-
tory for dairy and fine-bred cattle, more arsenic may be added, up
to 9 or 10 pounds to the 500 gallons, in the disinfection of range cattle.
When once filled, the vat is ready for use at all times, unless rains
should dilute its contents, when ingredients have to be added in
the proper proportions for the amount of rain water which has
fallen or drained into the tank. In exposed tanks the amount of
evaporation is considerable during the hot summer months, reducing
the fluid in the vats as much as 3 inches between dippings. In add-
ing ingredients tQ keep the fluid at the pepper depth for dipping,
this evaporation does not have to be accounted for, and the medicinal
ingredients should be added in full proportion for all water used.
The same solution remains active as a tickicide indefinitely, but the
number of times it should be used for redippings depend? entirely
on the number of cattle dipped each month. Diet carried in on the
hoofs; hair which comes off the animals in considerable quantities
during the shedding season, and urine and feces evacuated by the
cattle in the v$t $nd draining pen tend to befoul the solution. When
therefore the number of cattle dipped monthly reaches into the
hundreds of he^cl it is our practice to clefin out the yai after each
three dippings.
Fopowipg dipping in arsenical solution care must bp used in driv-
ing cattle to prevent overheating, as injurious and even fatal results
have followed forced driving, especially during hot weather.
While this solution is very poisonous, it has been used very exten-
sively in this State with no bad results, and with ordinary precautions
ERADICATING CATTLE TICKS IN CALIFORNIA. 298
its poisonous nature is not a good reason against its use. It is our
practice to place on each vat in which the solution is used a notice read-
ing as follows:
WARNING !
The fluid in this vat is
POISONOUS
to man and all animals
t)o riot allow it to contaminate any feed
Cattle should be watered before
or water supply.
dipping.
THE DIPPING VATS FOUND MOST PRACTICABLE.
Dipping being the most practicable method of disinfecting cattle
for eradicating ticks, it is necessary for those engaged in eradication
work to become familiar with the various kinds of vats, in order
that the ihost suitable form may be recommended under thfc various
conditions met, depending on the kind and number of cattle to be
treated arid the financial condition of the owner.
In cdmmtmities where several small tick-infested ranches are
located within a Short distance <rf eifich other cooperative vats have
b^en established. The several owners of the infested places would
club tdgether, select the most convenient location to build the vat,
atld subscribe the iiecessary money for its installation. One rancher
is appointed treasurer, and it is his duty to collect all riioney for dip-
ping, buy the dipping materials, and act as manager of the plant.
A charge is made for dipping, usiially not over 5 cents a Head, and
if at the end of the dipping season there is a surplus this is divided
among the subscribers. In this Way the several ranchers have the
advantage of a dipping vat without each being put id the cost of
installing one. A dipping day is set once each month, and all in-
fested herds are dipped at this time, the owners assisting each other
in the operation.
In other bases one lonelier will install the vat aiid allow his
neighbors to dip their catty in it, charging A nominal fee for the
service.
In California thrfee styles of vats are used, nkmely, tHe swifti vat,
the cage vat, land the wade vat.
• THE SWIM VAT.
The swim vat is by far the most practical forTfffigfc sttfcklttfd where
large numbers of cattle are to be dipped. It has the advantage of
Q tfhd *eqmt(E& Httle labdt in tlte operation of dlti|iiH^. The
et stfcfi a vat feaii be cbnshiicte&, tip to 80 6? $6 ifeet fft t^ife dip
Wsti&M, as^it^hksb^li fdMd'Mt the actftM'tfE Wi arsenical
solution is more potent if the cattle are submerged for at least twenty
294 26TH REPORT, BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY.
seconds, and such a length of time is recommended when mature ticks
are present on the cattle. However, in this State successful results
have followed the use of much shorter tanks. Such vats may be
constructed of lumber or cement. The latter is preferable, as it has
not the disadvantage of leaking, which is common in wooden vats,
and is more durable, A swim vat built after the plans shown in
ERADICATING CATTLE TICKS IN CALIFORNIA. 295
figure 7 will prove very satisfactory. This figure, as well as the fol-
lowing specifications and list of materials, is taken from Farmers'
Bulletin 378, by H. W. Graybill. A vat constructed according to
these plans will hold 2,088 gallons when filled to a depth of 5 feet.
In our experience in the use of such vats in California it has been
found advantageous to construct the vat with a somewhat steeper
slope at the entrance end than is indicated in the plans. With this
modification the cattle are plunged more quickly into the vat, and
time can be saved in dipping a large number of animals.
Excavation.—Excavate for the vat, as shown by the drawings (fig. 7), to the
proper depth. Level the bottom of the pit for the sills. After the vat is com-
pleted fill in around it, using the surplus earth to bring the grade at the sides
of the vat a little above the natural grade and slope the surface away from the
vat. Dig the holes required for all posts, etc.
Carpenter work.—The drawings show the vat constructed according to two
methods. One method is to make the sides of 4 by 4 inch posts spaced about
3 feet apart and lined with 2 by 8 inch dressed, sized, and bevel-edged plank,
using 20-penny spikes to fasten them to the posts and braces. All the joints are
to be calked with oakum well driven in with a calking iron and pitched. The
floor of the vat and the inclines are to be made of 2-inch plank with joints
calked, the exit incline to have 2 by 4 inch cleats spiked to the plank flooring.
The slide should have an angle of about 25° and should be covered with No. 16
galvanized iron.
The other method is to build the sides of the vat of 2 by 4 inch posts and 2
by 4 inch braces spaced about 16 inches on centers. The 2 by 4 inch posts and
braces are to be lined with f by 8 inch tongued-and-grooved flooring, blind
nailed at every bearing with 10-penny nails. All the joints are to be laid in
white lead paste and the boards firmly driven up.
Lumber,—The lumber used in the construction of the vat must be thoroughly
dried and seasoned stock, free from large and loose knots, straight grained,
and free from sap.
Gutters.—The gutters for the dripping pens should be made of sound stock,
the bottom plank housed into the sides and ends, and the ends housed into
the sides. All the joints are to be laid in white lead paste and thoroughly
nailed. Gutters are to have 3-inch fall in 11 feet.
Concrete vat.—The concrete vat should be made of concrete composed of 1
part by measure of good Portland cement, 3 parts of clean sharp sand, and 5
parts of broken rock, the broken rock to be not larger than will pass in any
direction through a 2-inch ring. The rock should be washed free of dust.
Concrete should be mixed wet and well tamped into place.
Bill of materials.—Lumber for vat when constructed of 2-inch material and
4 by 4 inch posts:
Sills 8 pieces 4 by 4 inches by 10 feet long.
1 piece 4 by 4 inches by 16 feet long.
1 piece 4 by 4 inches by 14 feet long.Posts 6 pieces 4 by 4 inches by 12 feet long.
5 pieces 4 by 4 inches by 10 feet long.
1 piece 4 by 4 inches by 16 feet long.
. 6 pieces 4 by 4 inches by 12 feet long.
Braces <> piece 4 by 4 lncnes by 10 feet long.
[1 piece 4 by 4 inches by 6 feet long.
296 26TH REPORT, BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY.
Guards.
Sides-
Floor-
Cleats-
2 pieces 2 by 8 inches by 18 feet long.
1 piece 2 by 8 inches by 16 feet long.
2 pieces 2 by 8 inches by 12 feet long.
1 piece 2 by 8 inches by 10 feet long.
18 pieces 2 by 8 inches by 20 feet long.
25 pieces 2 by 8 inches by 18 feet long.
2 pieces 2 by 8 inches by 16 feet long.
2 pieces 2 by 6 inches by 18 feet long.
Dressed one side and two edges.
Edges beveled for calking.
3 pieces 2 by 10 inches by 20 feet long.
2 pieces 2 by 10 inches by 16 feet long.
1 piece 2 by 10 inches by 14 feet long.
1 piece 2 by 10 inches by 7 feet long.
1 piece 2 by 12 inches by 12 feet long.
Dressed one side and two edges.
Edges beveled for calking.
4 pieces 2 by 4 inches by 12 feet long.
Lumber for vat when constructed of flooring and 2 by 4 inch posts:
Posts_
Sills 7 pieces 2 by 4 inches by 14 feet long.
J28 pieces 2 by 4 inches by 18 feet long.
|4 pieces 4 by 4 inches by 11 feet long.
{15 pieces 2T by 4 inches by 12 feet long.
2 pieces 2 by 4 inches by 10 feet long.
2 pieces 2 by 4 inches by 16 feet long.
Guards Materials the same as specified above.
Sides 550 feet b. m. I by 8 inches tongue-and-groove
flooring.
Floor Materials the same as specified above.
Cleats - Materials the same as specified above.
Lumber for draining pens:
Mud sills 10 pieces 4 by 12 inches by 2 feet long (cedar or
cypress).
Sleepers 4 pieces 6 by 6 inches by 12 feet long.
Joists .13 pieces 2 by 12 inches by 12 feet long.
Floor ^ 360 feet b. m. tongue-and-groove flooring £ by 8
inches—12-foot pieces.
Cleats 265 linear feet 1 by 3 inches.
Sides: 4 pieces 2 by 12 inches by 11 feet long
(dressed).
Bottom and ends: 2 pieces 2 by 12 inches by 12
Gutters feet (dressed).
Bottom housed into sides and ends. Ends housed
into sides. All joints calked and white leaded
or pitched.
11 pieces 4 by 4 inches by 7 feet long.
Posts . 2 pieces 4 by 4 inches by 8 feet long.
2 pieces 4 by 4 inches by 9 feet long.
2 pieces 2 by 8 inches by 18 feet long.
Rails > 5 pieces 2 by 8 inches by 16 feet long.
18 pieces 2 by 8 inches by 12 feet long.
26TH AN. RPT. , BUR. OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY, U. S. DEPT. OF AGR. , 1909. PLATE XV.
iEra
! ji
i • •' '4
- Xi,
CAGE VAT FOR DIPPING CATTLE.
The first figure shows gross appearance of vat and apparatus. The second figuTe shows vat with cage down and attendant ducking animal. The third figure shows vat
with cage raised and animal walking out.
EEADIOATING CATTLE TICKS IN CALIFORNIA. 297
Braces 2 pieces 2 by 4 inches by 10 feet long.
7 pieces 1 by 6 inches by 12 feet long.
Hardware for vat and draining pens:
4 pair 12-inch heavy T hinges and screws.
4 wrought-iron hooks and staples.
I pair wrought-iron hook hinges, 12-inch wood screw hooks, and screws.
50 pounds 20-penny wire nails.
15 pounds 10-penny wire nails.
12 square feet No. 16 galvanized iron.
When vat is constructed of flooring and 2 by 4 posts, the following additional
hardware will be required:
19 pounds 20-penny wire nails.
12 pounds 10-penny wire nails.
Material for concrete vat:
Concrete, 1 part Portland cement, 3 parts sand, 5 parts broken rock or
gravel.
19 cubic yards broken rock or gravel.
18 cubic yards sand.
30 barrels Portland cement.
THE CAGE VAT.
The cage vat, when properly constructed, is very practical and is
recommended for the disinfection of smaller herds and gentle cattle^
especially dairy cows.
It has the advantages
of being economical in
the amount of dipping
solution necessary to
charge the vat; ani-
mals may be held in
the solution as long as
desired, and the oper-
ation of dipping is
almost entirely with-
out rough handling or
worry to the cattle.
This last is an impor-
tant factor in the
disinfection of milch
cows without causing
shrinkage in the milk
flow. Dairy herds
should be dipped in,, • • J« • FRONT VIEW SIOCVIEW
the morning immedi-
, . „ ° f ._. . FIG. 8.—Plans for cage vat.
ately after milking.
They can then be turned out to pasture with very little time lost from
feed. Plate XV and figures 8 and 9 show this form of vat as it ^
298 26TH REPORT, BUREAU OF INDUSTRY.
given most satisfactory results in California. The following specifi-
cations and bill of materials are given for its construction:
Tank.
The tank should be made 7 feet deep, 3 feet wide, and 8 feet long, inside
measurements.
Four corner posts, 4 by 6 inches by 18 feet, must be planed on outer sides
to join planks for sides and ends.
Sides, 7 planks 2 by 12 inches by 16 feet cut to 8 feet long.
Ends, 3 planks 2 by 12 inches by 12 feet cut to 3 feet long.
Ends, 1
A L
\ ,
1
r
J
1
J
1
i
I
—L
Inches
pieces
by
3
plank 2 by 12
16 feet cut two
feet long; left
O/
so"
over, 2 by 12 inches by
10 feet.
Bottom, use left-over 2
by 12 inches by 10 feet cut
to 3 feet 4 inches long.
Bottom, 2 planks 2 by 12
inches by 12 feet cut to
3 feet 4 inches long.
Braces, ends, and sides,
five 1 by 6 inches by 12
feet.
Gates, two 1 by 6 inches
by 14 feet.
Gates, two 1 by 6 inches
by 12 feet.
Gates, four hinges and
two hooks.
Cage.
Floor, two 2 by 6 inches
by 16 feet cut to 7 feet 11
inches long.
Floor cleats, one 2 by 3
inches by 12 feet cut 28
inches long.
Sides, six 1 by 6 inches
by 14 feet cut to 6 feet 11
inches long.
Top piece, one 4 by 6
inches by 6 feet.
Make hangers of \ by 2-
inch iron.
Wheel.
Shaft, one 8 by 8 inches
by 10 feet, turned to set in bed pieces.
Three-eighths-inch cable or chain attached to shaft to raise cage.
Bed pieces, make two 3 by 8 inches by 3 feet.
Spokes, twelve 1£ by 3 inches by 12 feet.
Flanges, four 1 by 12 inches by 16 feet.
Have flanges extend 3 inches over ends of spokes and run rope over free ends
of spokes.
Use f-inch rope 140 feet long, have pulley in a block sunk in ground, and lift
cage with saddle horse or horse and traces.
cfi
PIG. 9.—Detail plans for cage vat; a, Cross section ofcage; 6, side view of cage; c, floor of cage; d, crosssection of tank. -
ERADICATING CATTLE TICKS IN CALIFORNIA. 299
Lumber and milling companies furnish these materials, sized and
cut in proper manner, to the ranchers for from $55 to $65. The
builder then has in addition the labor of excavating the pit and put-
ting the tank together. Draining pens with such vats are not essen-
tial and are rarely used, as the animal drains while the cage is being
raised.
This vat is installed near the corrals and requires only a short
chute leading from the corral to the cage. In operating such a vat
the animal is driven through the chute into the cage and the end
gate closed. The hoist rope is released and the weight of the animal
carries the cage down into the fluid. If the animal is not completely
submerged, its head is forced under by the foot of an assistant wear-
ing rubber boots. After remaining in the solution the proper length
of time (twenty to thirty seconds) the cage is raised by attaching
PIG. 10.—Plans for small " wade tank." Vertical section.
the end of the hoist rope to the saddle horn or the swingletree of a
horse in harness. During the raising of the cage the animal drains,
and after a short interval the opposite end gate is opened and the
animal passes out. With this vat from 30 to 50 animals can be
dipped per hour.
THE WADE TANK.
The wade tank is recommended only in the disinfection of very
small herds. It can be constructed with an outlay of less than $10
for materials, thus being cheaper than a good spray pump. Figure
10 shows plans of such a vat, which can be made of either lumber
or cement.
In the use of this tank the animal is led in by a rope or halter and
cross-tied or held. The solution in the vat, being 36 inches deep,
300 26TH EEPORT, BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY.
thoroughly saturates the lower parts of the body and sides, which
are always most heavily infested and most difficult to reach with a
spray pump or swab. The upper parts of the body are then thor-
oughly wet by pouring the dipping solution from a pail over the
head and back. The animal is then led out at the opposite end of
the vat and allowed to drain on the incline or in the chute. With
this method less fluid is used than in spraying or swabbing, the opera-
tion is easier to perform, and it is efficacious.
PBESENT CONDITIONS IN CALIFOBNIA.<*
As a result of four years' work by the Bureau and state officials,
California has only 9,315 square miles, instead of 69,755 square miles,
of territory in quarantine for Texas-fever ticks. Of this area re-
maining in quarantine a large percentage is at present tick free and
should soon be in a condition to be released.
Of the original 153,476 cattle infested there remain under local
quarantine 41,906. This number includes all herds on which the
slightest infestation has been found in 1910, and many of these will
no doubt be free with the close of this season's work. Half of this
number are on one large ranch where eradication work has been slow
on account of its size, the roughness of the range, and lack of co-
operation from the owner.
Prior to the inauguration of tick eradication in California con-
demnations for Texas fever were numerous in the abattoirs having
federal inspection. During the past two years not a single condem-
nation for this disease has occurred in Los Angeles, where the
majority of the cattle from the quarantined area are slaughtered. In
the past year deaths from Texas fever on the ranges, where some
years back losses annually reached into the thousands of head, have
been so few as to be hardly worthy of notice. Our experience has
proved that tick eradication is not only possible, but with stringent
laws and proper methods is very practicable. When attained it
returns to the individual owner and the cattle industry at large many
times more than the cost of its accomplishment.
tt Data brought down to summer of 1910.
o