2022 
Water Quality Report
Through comprehensive water quality compliance testing programs, your drinking water is constantly monitored from source to tap , 
allowing Santa Margarita Water District to distribute well over 7.8 billion gallons of drinking water each year.  
This ensures your drinking water meets or surpasses all federal and state Safe Drinking Water mandates.
Trampas Canyon  
Reservoir & Dam
Trampas Canyon  
Reservoir & Dam
Your 2022 Water Quality ReportYour 2022 Water Quality Report
S
ince 1990, California public water utilities have been providing an 
annual Water Quality Report to their customers. This year’s  
report covers calendar year 2021 drinking water quality testing and 
reporting. 
Santa Margarita Water District (SMWD) vigilantly safeguards its 
water supply and, as in years past, the water delivered to your home 
meets or surpasses the quality standards required by federal and  
state regula tory agencies. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(USEPA) and the State Water Resources Control Board, Division of  
Drinking Water (DDW) are the agencies responsible for establishing 
and enforcing drinking water quality standards. 
The Irvine Ranch Water District (IRWD) and Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWDSC) supply 
treated imported surface water to SMWD and t est for unregulated chemicals in our water supply. Unregulated  
chemical monitoring helps USEPA and DDW determine where certain chemicals occur and whether new standards 
need to be established for those chemicals to protect public health. 
Through drinking water quality testing  
programs carried out by IRWD and MWDSC 
for treated surface water and the SMWD for  
the distribution system, your drinking water is 
constantly monitored from source to tap for  
regulated and unregulated constituents. In  
most cases, SMWD goes beyond what is  
required by more frequent testing on chemicals 
that may have known health risks but do not  
have drinking water standards. The State  
allows us to monitor for some contaminants  
less than once per year because the concen -
tra tions of these contaminants do not change 
frequent ly. Some of our data, though more  
than one year old, are representative. 
/ornament23 
This report contains 
important information about 
your drinking water. 
T ranslate it, or speak with someone 
who understands it. 
/ornament23 
Este informe contiene información 
muy importante sobre su agua potable.  
Tradúzcalo o hable con alguien 
que lo entienda bien.
We Appreciate All You Do 
to Save Water
T
hank you! For all we’ve been 
through these many years of 
intermittent drought, the Santa 
Margarita Water District extends 
its heartfelt thanks to all of you 
who have worked so hard to 
conserve water. When the 
seemingly impossible was asked 
of you — that you conserve 20% 
of our water at the height of the last drought — you not only 
met this goal, you exceeded it. And best of all, you continued 
to conserve water after the drought was officially declared to 
be over. 
Now, as we potentially enter another year of drought, the 
District is in a better position than it has been in previous 
droughts. All because you, our customers, take your 
responsibilities seriously. You know we live in an arid land, 
and you recognize water conservation has to be more than a 
passing passion — it must be a way of life. 
As with all of you, it is our fondest hope we will escape 
another year of drought. But beyond our hopes, we have 
confidence the customers of the Santa Margarita Water 
District will always know what to do to conserve their water. 
For current drought information and available resources, 
please visit www.smwd.com/savewater.
Middle Chiquita 
Reservoirs
~ 2 ~
In order to ensure that tap water is safe to drink, USEPA and  
the DDW prescribe regulations that limit the amount of certain  
contaminants in water provided by public water systems. 
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration regulations and  
California law also establish limits for contaminants in bottled  
water that must provide the same protection for public health.  
Drinking water, including bottled water, may reasonably be  
expected to contain at least small amounts of some contami -
nants. The presence of contami nants does not necessarily  
indicate that water poses a health risk. 
More information about contaminants and  
potential health effects can be obtained by calling the 
USEPA’s Safe Drinking Water Hotline at  
(800) 426-4791. or check their website at:  
www.epa.gov/safewater. 
Drinking Water Fluoridation 
Fluoride has been added to U.S. drinking water  
supplies since 1945. Of the 50 largest cities in the  
U.S., 43 fluoridate their drinking water. 
In December 2007, MWDSC joined a majority of the nation’s 
public water suppliers in  
adding fluoride to drinking  
water in order to prevent  
tooth decay. MWDSC was  
in compliance with all  
provisions of the State's  
fluoridation system require -
ments. Fluoride levels in  
drinking water are limited under California state regulations at a 
maximum dosage of 2 parts per million. 
Additional information about the fluoridation of drinking water 
is available on these websites: 
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
1 (800) 232-4636 S www.cdc.gov/fluoridation/  
State Water Resources Control Board, 
Division of Drinking Water 
www.waterboards.ca.gov/ drinking_water/ 
certlic/ drinkingwater/Fluoridation.html 
For more information about MWDSC’s fluori dation program, 
please contact Edgar G. Dymally at (213) 217 -5709 or at  
edymally@mwdh2o.com. 
Sources of Supply 
Your drinking water consists of imported treated surface water 
from MWDSC, as well as treated surface water from IRWD’s  
Baker Water Treatment Plant, which utilizes surface water from 
both MWDSC and Santiago Reservoir (Irvine Lake). MWDSC’s  
imported water sources are the Colorado River and the State  
Water Project, which draws water from the Sacramento-San  
Joaquin River Delta. 
Basic Information About 
Drinking Water Contaminants 
The sources of drinking water  
(both tap water and bottled water) 
include rivers, lakes, streams,  
ponds, reservoirs, springs and  
wells. As water travels over the  
surface of land or through the  
layers of the ground it dissolves  
naturally occurring minerals and, in 
some cases, radioactive material, and can pick up substances  
resulting from the presence of animal and human activity.  
Contaminants that may be present in source water include: 
S Microbial contaminants, such as viruses and bacteria, which 
may come from sewage treatment plants, septic systems,  
agricultural livestock operations and wildlife. 
S Inorganic contaminants, such as salts and metals, which can 
be natur ally occurring or result from urban storm runoff,  
industrial or domestic wastewater discharges, oil and gas  
production, mining and farming. 
S Organic chemical contaminants , 
including synthetic and volatile  
organic chemicals, are by-products 
of industrial processes and petro -
leum production, and can also  
come from gasoline stations, urban 
storm water runoff, agricultural appli -
 cation and septic systems. 
S Radioactive contaminants, which can be naturally occurring  
or be the result of oil and gas production or mining activities. 
S Pesticides and herbicides, which may come from a variety of 
sources such as agriculture, urban storm  water runoff and  
residential uses.
Constant Monitoring Ensures Continued ExcellenceConstant Monitoring Ensures Continued Excellence
~ 3 ~
To Safeguard Against Issues that May Affect Your Health 
We Comply with All State & Federal Water Quality Regulations
Disinfectants and Disinfection Byproducts 
Disinfection of drinking water was one of the major public  
health advances in the 20 th century. Disinfection was a major  
factor in reducing waterborne disease epidemics caused by  
pathogenic bacteria and viruses, and it remains an essential part 
of drinking water treatment today. 
Water imported from IRWD and MWDSC contain chloramines, 
a combination of chlorine and ammonia, as a drink ing water  
disinfect ant. Chloramines are effective killers of bacteria and  
other micro organisms that may cause diseases. 
Chlorine disinfection  
has almost completely  
elimi nated from our lives 
the risks of microbial  
water borne diseases.  
Chlorine is added to your 
drinking water at the  
source (surface water  
treatment plant). Enough chlorine is added so that it does not  
completely dissipate through the distribution system pipes. This 
chlorine helps to prevent the growth of bacteria in the pipes that 
carry drinking water from the source into your home. 
However, chlorine can react with naturally-occur ring materials 
in the water to form unintended chemical byproducts, called  
disinfec  tion byproducts (DBPs), which may pose health risks.  
A major challenge is how to balance the risks from micro bial  
pathogens and DBPs. It is important to provide protection from  
these microbial pathogens while simultaneously ensuring  
decreasing health risks from disinfection byproducts. The Safe  
Drinking Water Act requires the USEPA to develop rules to  
achieve these goals. 
Trihalomethanes  
(THMs) and Haloacetic  
Acids (HAAs) are the  
most common and most 
studied DBPs found in  
drinking water treated  
with chlorine. In 1979,  
the USEPA set the  
maximum amount of total THMs allowed in drinking water at 100 
parts per billion as an annual running average. Effective in January 
2002, the Stage 1 Disinfectants / Disinfection Byproducts Rule  
lowered the total THM maximum contaminant level to 80 parts 
per billion and added HAAs to the list of regulated chemicals in  
drinking water.  
Stage 2 of the regulation was finalized by USEPA in 2006,  
which further controls allowable levels of DBPs in drinking water 
without compromising disinfection itself. A required distribution 
system evaluation was completed in 2008 and a Stage 2  
monitoring plan has been approved by DDW. Full  Stage 2  
compliance began in 2012. Your drinking water complies with the 
Stage 2 Disinfectants / Disinfection Byproducts Rule. 
Chloramines form less disinfectant by-products. People who  
use dialysis machines may want to take special pre cautions and 
consult their physician for appropriate type of water treatment.  
Customers who maintain fish ponds, tanks or aquaria should also 
make necessary adjustments in water quality treatment, as these 
disinfectants are toxic to fish. 
Cryptosporidium 
Cryptosporidium  is a microscopic organism that, when  
ingested, can cause diarrhea, fever, and other gastrointestinal  
symptoms. The organism comes from animal and/ or human  
wastes and may be in surface  
water. MWDSC tested their  
source water and treated surface 
water for Crypto sporidium in 2021 
but did not detect it. As a safe -
guard, Cryptosporidium  is elimi -
nated from the water using an  
effective treatment combi nation 
includ ing sedimen tation, filtration, and disinfection. 
The USEPA and the federal Centers for Disease Control guide -
lines on appropriate means to lessen the risk of infection by  
Cryptosporidium and other microbial contaminants are available  
from USEPA’s Safe Drinking Water hotline at (800) 426-4791  
between 10 a.m. and 4  p.m. Eastern Time (7  a.m. to 1 p.m. in  
California). 
Immunocompromised People 
Some people may be more vulner -
able to contami  nants in drinking water 
than the general population. Immuno-
compromised people, such as those  
with cancer who are undergoing  
chemo therapy, persons who have had  
organ trans plants, people with  
HIV / AIDS or other immune system disorders, some elderly  
persons and infants can be particularly at risk from infections.  
These people should seek advice about drinking water from their 
health care providers. 
~ 4 ~
Table Legend 
What is a Water Quality Goal? 
In addition to mandatory water quality standards, USEPA and the DDW have set voluntary 
water quality goals for some contaminants.  Water quality goals are often set at such low  
levels that they are not achiev able in practice and are not directly measurable. Nevertheless, 
these goals provide useful guidance and directions for water manage ment practices. 
The charts in this report include three types of water quality goals: 
S Maximum Contaminant Level Goal (MCLG): The level of a contami nant in drinking water 
below which there is no known or expected risk to health. MCLGs are set by the USEPA. 
S Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level Goal (MRDLG): The level of a disinfectant added 
for water treatment below which there is no known or expected risk to health. MRDLGs 
are set by USEPA. 
S Public Health Goals (PHG):  The level of a contaminant in drinking water below which  
there is no known or expected risk to health. PHGs are set by the California Environmental 
Protection Agency – Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment.
What are Water Quality Standards? 
Drinking water standards established by the USEPA and DDW set limits for sub stances that may affect 
consumer health or aesthetic qualities of drinking water. The charts in this report show the following 
types of water quality standards: 
S Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL):  The highest level of a contaminant that is allowed in  
drinking water. Primary MCLs are set as close to the PHGs (or MCLGs) as is economically and  
technologically feasible. 
S Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level (MRDL):  The level of a disinfectant added for water  
treatment that may not be exceeded at the consumer’s tap. 
S Secondary MCLs are set to protect the odor, taste, and appearance of drinking water. 
S Primary Drinking Water Standard:  MCLs for contaminants that affect health  along with their  
monitoring and reporting requirements and water treatment requirements. 
S Regulatory Action Level (AL): The concentration of a contaminant which, if exceeded, triggers 
treatment or other requirements that a water system must follow. 
S Treatment Technique (TT):  A required process intended to reduce the level of chemicals in  
drinking water that are difficult and sometimes impossible to measure directly.
2021 Metropolitan Water District of Southern California Treated Surface Water 
                                                                                         PHG                Average               Range of                  MCL                Typical Source 
 Chemical                                                 MCL              (MCLG)             Amount             Detections            Violation?           of Chemical 
Radiologicals – Tested in 2020 and 2021 
Alpha Radiation (pCi/L)                                         15                        (0)                          ND                          ND – 3                          No                     Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Beta Radiation (pCi/L)                                           50                        (0)                           5                             4 – 6                            No                     Decay of Natural and Man-made Deposits 
Uranium (pCi/L)                                                    20                      0.43                          2                             1 – 3                            No                     Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Inorganic Chemicals – Tested in 2021 
Aluminum (ppm)                                                    1                        0.6                        0.141                      ND – 0.21                        No                     Treatment Process Residue, Natural Deposits 
Barium (ppm)                                                        1                          2                         0.111                         0.111                           No                     Refinery Discharge, Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Bromate (ppb)                                                      10                       0.1                          ND                         ND – 4.6                         No                     Byproduct of Drinking Water Ozonation 
Fluoride (ppm)                                                       2                          1                           0.7                        0.6 – 0.9                         No                     Water Additive for Dental Health 
Secondary Standards* – Tested in 2021 
Aluminum (ppb)                                                  200*                     600                         141                        ND – 210                        No                     Treatment Process Residue, Natural Deposits 
Chloride (ppm)                                                   500*                     n/a                          96                          95 – 97                          No                     Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Color (color units)                                                15*                      n/a                           1                                1                               No                     Naturally-occurring Organic Materials 
Odor (threshold odor number)                               3*                       n/a                           2                                2                               No                     Naturally-occurring Organic Materials 
Specific Conductance (µmho/cm)                       1,600*                    n/a                         958                       950 – 965                        No                     Substances that Form Ions in Water 
Sulfate (ppm)                                                      500*                     n/a                         214                       214 – 215                        No                     Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Total Dissolved Solids (ppm)                              1,000*                    n/a                         597                            597                             No                     Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Unregulated Chemicals – Tested in 2021 
Alkalinity, total as CaCO3 (ppm)                   Not Regulated               n/a                         125                       124 – 126                       n/a                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Boron (ppm)                                                      NL = 1                    n/a                         0.13                           0.13                            n/a                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Calcium (ppm)                                             Not Regulated               n/a                          66                          65 – 66                         n/a                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Hardness, total as CaCO3 (ppm)                   Not Regulated               n/a                         274                       271 – 276                       n/a                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Hardness, total (grains/gallon)                     Not Regulated               n/a                          16                              16                             n/a                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Magnesium (ppm)                                        Not Regulated               n/a                          25                          24 – 26                         n/a                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
pH (pH units)                                               Not Regulated               n/a                          8.1                             8.1                             n/a                    Hydrogen Ion Concentration 
Potassium (ppm)                                          Not Regulated               n/a                          4.4                        4.2 – 4.6                        n/a                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Sodium (ppm)                                              Not Regulated               n/a                          94                          93 – 95                         n/a                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Total Organic Carbon (ppm)                                  TT                        n/a                          2.4                        1.9 – 2.8                        n/a                    Various Natural and Man-made Sources 
ppb = parts per billion; ppm = parts per million; pCi/L = picoCuries per liter; µmho/cm = micromhos per centimeter; ND = not detected; 
MCL = Maximum Contaminant Level; (MCLG) = federal MCL Goal; PHG = California Public Health Goal; 
NL = Notification Level; n/a = not applicable; TT = treatment technique 
*Chemical is regulated by a secondary standard. 
 Turbidity – combined filter effluent                              Treatment                    Turbidity                          TT                        Typical Source 
 Metropolitan Water District Diemer Filtration Plant                Technique               Measurements               Violation?                  of Chemical 
1) Highest single turbidity measurement                                               0.3 NTU                                 0.03                                    No                            Soil Runoff 
2) Percentage of samples less than 0.3 NTU                                           95%                                  100%                                   No                            Soil Runoff 
Turbidity is a measure of the cloudiness of the water, an indication of particulate matter, some of which might include harmful microorganisms.             NTU = nephelometric turbidity units 
Low turbidity in Metropolitan’s treated water is a good indicator of effective filtration. Filtration is called a ”treatment technique” (TT).  
A treatment technique is a required process intended to reduce the level of chemicals in drinking water that are difficult and sometimes impossible to measure directly. 
Unregulated Chemicals Requiring Monitoring 
 Chemical                                 Notification Level                PHG                Average Amount           Range of Detections             Most Recent Sampling Date 
Manganese (ppb) **                                SMCL = 50                             n/a                                  2.2                                        1.1 – 4.8                                                  2020 
SMCL = Secondary MCL          ** Manganese is regulated with a secondary standard of 50 ppb but was not detected, based on the detection limit for purposes of reporting of 20 ppb.  
Manganese was included as part of the unregulated chemicals requiring monitoring.
~ 5 ~
Source Water Assessments
USEPA requires water suppliers to complete one Source Water 
Assessment (SWA) that utilizes infor ma tion collected in the  
watershed sanitary surveys. MWDSC completed its SWA in  
December 2002. The most recent SWA for IRWD’s  
Santiago Reservoir was completed in 2001. The SWA 
is used to evaluate the vulner ability of water sources 
to contamination and helps deter mine whether more 
protective measures are needed. 
Every five years, water suppliers are required by  
DDW to examine possible sources of drinking water  
contami nation in their water sources. The watershed  
sanitary survey for MWDSC’s Colorado River supply was  
recently updated in 2020 and for the State Water Project supply 
in 2016. The IRWD’s watershed sanitary survey for Santiago  
Reservoir (Irvine Lake) was updated in 2019. 
Water from the Colorado River is considered to be most  
vulnerable to contamination from recreation, urban/stormwater 
runoff, increasing urbanization in the watershed, and  
wastewater. Water supplies from Northern California’s 
State Water Project are most vulnerable to  
contamination from urban/stormwater runoff, wild -
life, agriculture, recreation, and wastewater. Water  
supplies from the Santiago Reservoir are most  
vulnerable to contamination from septic systems  
and wildfires. 
Copies of the most recent summary of either Water shed  
Sanitary Surveys or the SWAs can be obtained by calling SMWD 
Customer Service at (949) 459-6400.
2021 Irvine Ranch Water District – Baker Water Treatment Plant 
 Chemical                                           MCL        PHG (MCLG)      Avg. Amount      Range of Detections      MCL Violation?     Typical Source of Chemical 
Radiologicals – Tested in 2021 
Uranium (pCi/L)                                             20                    0.43                          1.5                                   1.5                                     No                   Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Inorganic Chemicals – Tested in 2021 
Aluminum (ppm)                                             1                      0.6                         <0.05                          ND – 1.1**                               No                   Treatment Process Residue, Natural Deposits 
Barium (ppm)                                                  1                       2                           0.111                               0.111                                   No                   Refinery Discharge, Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Fluoride (ppm)                                               2.0                      1                            0.33                                 0.33                                    No                   Erosion of Natural Deposits;  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Water Additive forDental Health 
Secondary Standards* – Tested in 2021 
Aluminum (ppb)                                           200*                  600                          <50                          ND – 1,100**                             No                   Treatment Process Residue, Natural Deposits 
Chloride (ppm)                                             500*                   n/a                          97.7                                 97.7                                    No                   Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Odor (threshold odor number)                        3*                     n/a                             1                                      1                                       No                   Naturally-occurring Organic Materials 
Specific Conductance (µmho/cm)                1,600*                 n/a                           973                                  973                                     No                   Substances that Form Ions in Water 
Sulfate (ppm)                                               500*                   n/a                           211                                  211                                     No                   Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Total Dissolved Solids (ppm)                       1,000*                 n/a                           590                                  590                                     No                   Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Turbidity (NTU)                                              5*                     n/a                           0.1                                   0.1                                     No                   Soil Runoff 
Unregulated Chemicals – Tested in 2021 
Alkalinity, total as CaCO3 (ppm)            Not Regulated            n/a                           124                                  124                                     n/a                  Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Boron (ppm)                                                NL=1                  n/a                         0.134                               0.134                                   n/a                  Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Calcium (ppm)                                      Not Regulated            n/a                          68.8                                 68.8                                    n/a                  Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Hardness, total as CaCO3 (ppm)            Not Regulated            n/a                           276                                  276                                     n/a                  Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Hardness, total (grains/gallon)               Not Regulated            n/a                            16                                    16                                      n/a                  Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Magnesium (ppm)                                 Not Regulated            n/a                          25.4                                 25.4                                    n/a                  Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
pH (pH units)                                        Not Regulated            n/a                           7.9                                   7.9                                     n/a                  Hydrogen Ion Concentration 
Potassium (ppm)                                   Not Regulated            n/a                           4.9                                   4.9                                     n/a                  Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Sodium (ppm)                                       Not Regulated            n/a                          91.3                                 91.3                                    n/a                  Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Total Organic Carbon (ppm)                           TT                     n/a                           2.4                                   2.4                                     n/a                  Various Natural and Man-made Sources 
ppb = parts per billion; ppm = parts per million; pCi/L = picoCuries per liter; µmho/cm = micromhos per centimeter; NTU = nephelometric turbidity units; 
MCL = Maximum Contaminant Level; PHG = California Public Health Goal; NL = Notification Level; n/a = not applicable; TT = treatment technique  
*Chemical is regulated by a secondary standard.     **MCL compliance is based on rolling annual average.  
 Turbidity – combined filter effluent                                     Treatment                       Turbidity                          TT                     Typical Source 
 Irvine Ranch Water District Baker Water Treatment Plant               Technique                  Measurements               Violation?               of Chemical 
1) Highest single turbidity measurement                                                      0.1 NTU                                   0.034                                   No                         Soil Runoff 
2) Percentage of samples less than 0.3 NTU                                                   95%                                     100%                                  No                         Soil Runoff 
Turbidity is a measure of the cloudiness of the water, an indication of particulate matter, some of which might include harmful microorganisms.             NTU = nephelometric turbidity units 
Low turbidity in the treated water is a good indicator of effective filtration. Filtration is called a ”treatment technique” (TT).  
A treatment technique is a required process intended to reduce the level of chemicals in drinking water that are difficult and sometimes impossible to measure directly.
~ 6 ~
About Lead in Tap Water 
If present, elevated levels of lead can cause serious health 
problems, especially for pregnant women and young children. 
Lead in drinking water is primarily from materials and  
components associated with lead 
service lines and home plumbing. 
SMWD is responsible for  
providing high quality drink ing  
water, but cannot control the  
variety of materials used in  
plumbing components. 
When your water has been  
sitting for several hours, you can minimize the potential for  
lead exposure by flushing your tap for 30 seconds to  
2 minutes before using water for drinking or cooking. 
If you are concern ed about lead in your water, you may wish 
to have your water tested. Information on lead in drinking  
water, testing methods, and steps you can take to minimize  
exposure is available from the Safe Drinking Water Hotline,  
(800) 426-4791, or at: www.epa.gov/safewater/lead.
Total Coliform Rule 
This Consumer Confidence Report (CCR) reflects changes  
in drinking water regulatory requirements during 2021. These  
revisions add the requirements of the federal Revised T otal  
Coliform Rule, effective since April 1,  
2016, to the existing state Total  
Coliform Rule. The revised rule main -
tains the purpose to protect public  
health by ensuring the integrity of the  
drinking water distribution system and 
monitoring for the presence of  
microbials (i.e., total coliform and  
E.  coli bacteria). The U.S. EPA anticipates greater public health 
protection as the rule requires water systems that are  
vulnerable to microbial contamination to identify and fix  
problems. Water systems that exceed a specified frequency of 
total coliform occurrences are required to conduct an assess -
ment to determine if any sanitary defects exist. If found, these 
must be corrected by the water system. The state Revised T otal 
Coliform Rule became effective July 1, 2021.
2021 Santa Margarita Water District Distribution System Water Quality 
 Disinfection Byproducts                  MCL (MRDL/MRDLG)      Average Amount      Range of Detections     MCL Violation?     Typical Source of Contaminant 
Total Trihalomethanes (ppb)                                          80                                        30                                   19 – 47                                No                  Byproducts of Chlorine Disinfection 
Haloacetic Acids (ppb)                                                   60                                         7                                   ND – 8.4                               No                  Byproducts of Chlorine Disinfection 
Chlorine Residual (ppm)                                              (4 / 4)                                   1.59                               1.03 – 1.83                             No                  Disinfectant Added for Treatment 
Aesthetic Quality 
Color (color units)                                                        15*                                      <1                                    ND – 1                                 No                  Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Odor (threshold odor number)                                       3*                                         1                                         1                                     No                  Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Turbidity (NTU)                                                              5*                                      <0.1                                 ND – 0.5                               No                  Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Total Dissolved Solids (ppm)                                      1,000*                                   626                                590 – 654                              No                  Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Unregulated Chemicals – Tested in 2021 
Hardness, total as CaCO3 (ppm)                            Not Regulated                              276                                272 – 278                              n/a                  Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Hardness, total (grains/gallon)                              Not Regulated                               16                                15.9 – 16.2                             n/a                  Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Alkalinity, total as CaCO3 (ppm)                            Not Regulated                              129                                126 – 136                              n/a                  Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Eight locations in the distribution system are tested quarterly for total trihalomethanes and haloacetic acids; forty-three locations are tested monthly for color, odor, and turbidity.  
MRDL = Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level; MRDLG = Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level Goal 
*Contaminant is regulated by a secondary standard to maintain aesthetic qualities (taste, odor, color). 
                                                                                                                 Highest Number                      Number of Months 
 Microbiological                           MCL              MCLG                              of Detections                               in Violation               Typical Source of Contaminant 
E. coli                                                      (a)                        0                                                   0                                                          0                            Human and animal fecal waste 
(a) Routine and repeat samples are total coliform-positive and either is E. coli-positive or system fails to take repeat samples following E. coli-positive routine sample  
or system fails to analyze total coliform-positive repeat sample for E. coli. 
Lead and Copper Action Levels at Residential Taps 
                             Action Level               Public              90th Percentile          Sites Exceeding AL /                    AL                       Typical Source  
                                    (AL)                 Health Goal                Value                    Number of Sites                 Violation?                 of Contaminant 
Lead (ppb)                         15                               0.2                               ND                                      0 / 51                                      No                           Corrosion of Household Plumbing 
Copper (ppm)                    1.3                               0.3                             0.064                                    0 / 51                                      No                           Corrosion of Household Plumbing 
Every three years, at least 50 residences are tested for lead and copper at-the-tap. Santa Margarita Water District tested 51 homes in the most recent set of samples collected in 2021.  
Lead was not detected in any sample. Copper was detected in 9 samples; none exceeded the Action Level (AL).  
A regulatory action level is the concentration of a contaminant which, if exceeded, triggers treatment or other requirements that a water system must follow.  
In 2021, no schools submitted a request to be sampled for lead. 
Unregulated Chemicals Requiring Monitoring in the Distribution System 
 Chemical                                           Notification Level               PHG              Average Amount            Range of Detections            Most Recent Sampling Date 
Haloacetic acids (HAA5) (ppb)                                     n/a                                  n/a                                7.23                                      2.73 – 12.8                                                2020 
Haloacetic acids (HAA6Br) (ppb)                                  n/a                                  n/a                                5.57                                      3.82 – 7.38                                                2020 
Haloacetic acids (HAA9) (ppb)                                     n/a                                  n/a                                11.7                                      6.17 – 18.2                                                2020 
~ 7 ~
Colorado
River
The
Bay-Delta
Gene
Pumping
Station
Chrisman
Pumping
Plant
Edmonston
Pumping
Plant
REDDING
SACRAMENTO
SAN
FRANCISCO
LOS
ANGELES
ORANGE
COUNTY
BAKERSFIELD
SAN
DIEGO
P A C I F I C
 O C E A N  
California Aqueduct
STATE WATER PROJECT
Colorado
Aqueduct
Millerton
Lake
Folsom
Lake
Shasta
LakeTrinity
Lake
Lake
Isabella
Lake
Oroville
Sacramento
River
Feather
River
San
Joaquin
River
New
Hogan
Reservoir
Castaic 
Lake
Pyramid
Lake
Silverwood
Lake
Lake
Perris
Lake
Mathews
Managed by the Metro poli-  
tan Water District of Southern 
California, the Colora do River 
Aqueduct begins near Parker  
Dam on the Colorado River. There, 
the Gene Pumping Station lifts the  
water over 300 feet, and it begins its  
242 mile journey to Lake Mathews, just  
outside the City of Corona. Along the way, 
the water passes through two  
reservoirs, five pumping stations,  
62 miles of canals, and 176 miles  
of tunnels, buried conduit and  
siphons. All told, the water is lifted 
four times, a  total of more than  
1,300 feet. 
After its journey across the  
Mojave Desert, the water descends into the  Coachella Valley 
and through the San Gorgonio Pass. Near Cabazon, the aqueduct 
flows underground, passing beneath the San Jacinto Mountains and 
continuing until it reaches its terminus at Lake Mathews. From there, 
156 miles of distribution lines, along with eight more tunnels, delivers  
the water throughout Southern California.
Have you ever wondered where your water comes from? Here in the Santa Margarita 
Water District, our water is surface water imported by the MWDSC and IRWD.  
MWDSC’s imported water sources are the Colorado River and the State Water  
Project, which draws water from the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta. 
Water from Northern California travels to us through a complex delivery system  
known as the California State Water Project. Designed and built in the 1960s, the  
State Water Project is one of the largest public water and power utilities in the world, 
providing drinking water for more than 25 million people statewide.  
Managed by the California Department of Water Resources, the project stretches  
over 700 miles, from Lake Oroville in the north to Lake Perris in the south. Water  
stored in Lake Oroville, Folsom Lake, and other tributaries, and fed by snow melt  
from the Sierra Mountains, flows into the Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers, and  
from there into reservoirs in the Bay-Delta region.  
From the Bay-Delta, giant pumps lift the water into the 444-mile-long California  
Aqueduct, there to flow southward to cities and farms in central and Southern 
California. Composed mainly of concrete-lined canals, the Aqueduct also  
includes over 20 miles of tunnels, more than 130 miles of pipelines, and 
27 miles of siphons. Along the way, the water is pumped 2,882 feet 
over the T ehachapi Mountains. The Edmonston Pumping Plant 
alone lifts millions of gallons a day up 1,926 feet, the highest 
single water lift in the world. 
Is it any wonder the State Water Project is the  
largest single consumer of power in the  
State of California?
THE CHRISMAN PUMPING PLANT 
ON THE CALIFORNIA AQUEDUCT
THE GENE  PUMPING STATION 
ON THE COLORADO AQUEDUCT
THE 
CALIFORNIA 
AQUEDUCT
T otal Dissolved Solids (TDS) is an indicator of the  
aesthetic characteristics of drinking water, and a gauge 
of a broad array of chemical constituents within the  
water. It is a measure of all the combined inorganic and 
organic substances, and while it is not associated with 
any health effects, TDS can impact the appearance  
and taste of water. 
TDS is mainly inorganic salts, as well as a small  
amount of organic  matter. Common inorganic salts  
found in water include calcium, magnesium,  
potassium and sodium, along with nitrates, chlorides  
and sulfates. These minerals originate from a variety  
of sources, both natural and through human activity. 
Alone, dissolved solids are usually not a health  
hazard. Some people, in fact, buy mineral water, which 
has naturally elevated levels of dissolved  
solids. The USEPA includes TDS as a  
second ary standard, meaning it is a  
voluntary guideline for aesthetic and  
cosmetic effects. Kept within the  
established guidelines, TDS can impart 
a favorable taste to water. Too low,  
however, can give water a flat taste. 
There are issues, how ever, with high 
levels of TDS. Increased TDS concen tra -
tions can produce hard water, which stains  
household fix tures, corrodes pipes, and imparts a 
metallic taste. 
Within the SMWD system, however, you can be assured that TDS are kept  
well within the established secondary standards.
Total Dissolved Solids, Alkalinity, and Hardness
F
or information about this report, or  
your water quality in general, please 
contact Customer Service at (949)  
459-6420 or custservice@smwd.com. 
The Santa Margarita Water District  
has two Regular Board meetings  each 
month. Meeting details can be found  on the District’s website at  
https:/ /smwd.com/meetings. 
Please feel free to partici pate in these meetings. 
For more information about the health effects of the listed  
contaminants in the following tables, call the USEPA hotline at  
(800) 426-4791. The USEPA also maintains a water-related website 
at www.epa.gov/safewater.
We Invite You 
to Learn More 
About Your 
Water’s Quality
Southern California has an arid climate and wise water use needs to  
become a part of everyone’s daily lives. For as finite as our water  
resources are, they get smaller every year. Simple water saving acts like 
the ones listed here can save countless gallons of water every day. 
S Soak pots and pans instead of letting water run while you scrub them  
clean. This both saves water and makes the job easier. 
S Keep a pitcher of drinking water in the refrigerator. This can save gallons 
of water every day and it’s always cold! 
S Plug the sink instead of running water to rinse your razor or wet your  
toothbrush. This can save upwards of 300 gallons of water a month. 
S Use a broom instead of a hose to clean off sidewalks and driveways. 
It takes very little time to sweep and the water savings quickly adds up. 
S Check your sprinkler system for leaks, overspray, and broken sprinkler 
heads and repair promptly. This can save countless gallons each time 
you water. 
S Water plants in the early morning. It reduces evaporation and ensures 
deeper watering. 
S Check your toilets for leaks and make sure to close showers and  
faucets properly. This can save countless gallons of water.
Where Do We Use Water the Most? 
Outdoor watering of lawns and gardens makes up approxi mately 60% of  
home water use. By reducing your outdoor water use — by either cutting back 
on irrigation or planting more drought tolerant landscaping — you can  
dramatically reduce your overall water use. 
Save the most where you use the most: Make your outdoor use efficient.
How Can You Learn More? 
There’s a wealth of information on the internet about Drinking  
Water Quality and water issues in general. Some  good sites to 
begin your own research are: 
Metropolitan Water District of So. California: 
www.mwdh2o.com 
California Department of Water Resources: 
www.water.ca.gov 
The Water Education Foundation: www.watereducation.org 
T o learn more about Water Conservation & Rebate Information: 
http:/ /smwd.com/ conservation 
And to see the Aqueducts in action, checkout these two videos: 
Wings Over the State Water Project: youtu.be/8A1v1Rr2neU 
Wings Over the Colorado Aqueduct: youtu.be/KipMQh5t0f4
26111 Antonio Parkway 
Rancho Santa Margarita, California 92688 
(949) 459-6400  S  www.smwd.com
Water Conservation is Always a PriorityWater Conservation is Always a Priority
T otal 
Dissolved Solids 
Average Amount: 626 mg/L 
Range: 590 – 654 mg/L 
Alkalinity 
Average Amount: 129 mg/L 
Range: 126 – 136 mg/L 
Hardness 
Average Amount: 276 mg/L 
Range: 272 – 278 mg/L