Reporting Y ear 2025
2026
Through comprehensive 
water quality compliance 
testing programs, your 
drinking water is monitored 
from source to tap to 
meet all federal and state 
drinking water regulatory 
requirements.

Este informe contiene información importante sobre su agua potable. T raducirlo, o 
hablar con alguien que lo entienda.
This report contains important information about your drinking water. T ranslate it, 
or speak with someone who understands it.
Your 2026 Water Quality Report
S
ince 1990, California public water utilities have been providing an annual Water Quality Report to their customers. This year’s 
report covers drinking water quality testing and reporting for 2025. Santa Margarita Water District (SMWD) vigilantly 
safeguards its water supply, and as in years past, the water delivered to your home meets or surpasses the quality standards required by 
federal and state regulatory agencies. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) and the State Water Resources Control 
Board (SWRCB), Division of Drinking Water (DDW) are the agencies responsible for establishing and enforcing drinking water 
quality standards.
The Irvine Ranch Water District (IRWD) and Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWDSC) supply treated, 
imported surface water to SMWD and test for unregulated chemicals in our water supply. Unregulated chemical monitoring helps 
U.S. EPA and DDW determine where certain chemicals occur and whether new standards need to be established for those chemicals 
to protect public health.
Through drinking water quality testing programs carried out by IRWD and MWDSC for treated surface water and the SMWD for 
the distribution system, your drinking water is constantly monitored from source to tap for regulated and unregulated constituents. 
In most cases, SMWD goes beyond what is required by more frequent testing on chemicals that may have known health risks but 
do not have drinking water standards. The state allows us to monitor for some contaminants less than once per year because the 
concentrations of these contaminants do not change frequently. Some of our data, though more than a year old, is representative. 
Important Health Information
S
ome people may be more vulnerable to contami -
nants in drinking water than the general population. 
Immunocompromised persons such as persons with cancer 
undergoing chemotherapy, persons who have undergone organ 
transplants, people with HIV/AIDS or other immune system 
disorders, some elderly, and infants can be particularly at risk 
from infections. These people should seek advice about drink-
ing water from their health-care providers. U.S. EPA/Centers 
for Disease Control (CDC) guidelines on appropriate means 
to lessen the risk of infection by Cryptosporidium and other 
microbial contaminants are available from the Safe Drinking 
Water Hotline, (800) 426-4791.
Cross Connections
I
n cooperation with the State Water Resources Control Board 
Division of Drinking Water, SMWD’s major goal is to ensure 
the distribution of a reliable potable water supply to all domestic 
water users. In order for the District to achieve this goal, a Cross-
Connection Control Management Plan (CCCMP) has been devel-
oped with an effective date of July 1, 2025. The District’s CCCMP 
was developed pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Cross-
Connection Control Policy Handbook (CCCPH) which replaced 
the State of California Administrative Code Title 17, Sections §7583 
through §7605 and applies to all State of California Public Water 
Systems, as defined in California’s Health and Safety Code (CHSC, 
section 116275(h)).
Sources of Supply
Y
our drinking water consists of imported treated surface 
water from MWDSC and treated surface water from 
IRWD’s Baker Water T reatment Plant, which uses surface 
water from both MWDSC and Santiago Reservoir (Irvine 
Lake). MWDSC’s imported water sources are the Colorado 
River and the State Water Project, which draws water from the 
Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta.
Learn More About Your Water’s Quality
F
or information about this report, or your water quality in 
general, please contact Customer Care at (949) 459-6420 
or CustomerCare@smwd.com. SMWD has several board 
meetings each month. The monthly board meeting schedule 
is available online at smwd.com/meetings. Please feel free to 
participate in these meetings.
2
About Lead in Tap Water
L
ead can cause serious health problems, especially for preg -
nant women and young children. Lead in drinking water 
is primarily from materials and components associated with 
service lines and home plumbing. Santa Margarita Water 
District is responsible for providing high quality drinking 
water and removing lead pipes, but cannot control the variety 
of materials used in plumbing components in your home. You 
share the responsibility for protecting yourself and your family 
from the lead in your home plumbing. You can take responsi-
bility by identifying and removing lead materials within your 
home plumbing and taking steps to reduce your family’s risk. 
Before drinking tap water, flush your pipes for several minutes 
by running your tap, taking a shower, doing laundry or a load 
of dishes. You can also use a filter certified by an American 
National Standards Institute accredited certifier to reduce lead 
in drinking water. If you are concerned about lead in your water 
and wish to have your water tested, contact Santa Margarita 
Water District at CustomerCare@smwd.com or call (949) 459-
6420. Information on lead in drinking water, testing methods, 
and steps you can take to minimize exposure is available at  
http://www.epa.gov/safewater/lead.
Chloramines
I
mported and locally produced drinking water is treated 
with chloramines, a combination of chlorine and ammonia, 
as a disinfectant. Chloramines effectively eliminate bacteria 
and other microorganisms that may cause disease. Compared 
to chlorine alone, chloramines last longer in the distribution 
system, produce fewer disinfection by-products, and have little 
to no odor when used properly.
Precautions
Kidney dialysis patients: Individuals using kidney dialysis 
machines should consult their health-care provider regarding 
appropriate water treatment.
Fish and aquatic life: Chloramines are toxic to fish and 
other aquatic organisms. Customers maintaining fish ponds, 
tanks, or aquariums should adjust water treatment methods 
accordingly.
For more information, visit  
epa.gov/dwreginfo/chloramines-drinking-water.
Drinking Water Contaminants
T
he sources of 
drinking water 
(both tap water and 
bottled water) include 
rivers, lakes, streams, 
ponds, reservoirs, 
springs, and wells. As 
water travels over the 
surface of the land or 
through the ground, 
it dissolves naturally occurring minerals and, in some cases, 
radioactive material and can pick up substances resulting from 
the presence of animals or from human activity.
Contaminants that may be present in source water include:
• Microbial contaminants, such as viruses and bacteria, 
that may come from sewage treatment plants, septic 
systems, agricultural livestock operations, and wildlife.
• Inorganic contaminants, such as salts and metals, 
that can be naturally occurring or result from urban 
stormwater runoff, industrial or domestic wastewater 
discharges, oil and gas production, mining, or farming.
• Pesticides and herbicides that may come from a variety 
of sources such as agriculture, urban stormwater runoff, 
and residential uses.
• Organic chemical contaminants, including synthetic 
and volatile organic chemicals, that are by-products of 
industrial processes and petroleum production and can 
also come from gas stations, urban stormwater runoff, 
agricultural application, and septic systems.
• Radioactive contaminants that can be naturally occurring 
or the result of oil and gas production and mining 
activities.
T o ensure that tap water is safe to drink, the U.S. EPA and 
SWRCB prescribe regulations that limit the amount of certain 
contaminants in water provided by public water systems. U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration regulations and California law 
also establish limits for contaminants in bottled water that 
provide the same protection for public health. 
Drinking water, including bottled water, may reasonably 
be expected to contain at least small amounts of some 
contaminants. The presence of contaminants does not 
necessarily indicate that water poses a health risk. More 
information about contaminants and potential health effects 
can be obtained by calling the U.S. EPA’s Safe Drinking Water 
Hotline, (800) 426-4791.
Your Water: Always Available, Always Assured
T
he Diemer Water T reatment Plant, located in the hills above Yorba Linda, processes up to 520 million gallons of clean water per 
day—enough to fill the Rose Bowl every four hours. The water is a blend from the Colorado River Aqueduct and the State Water 
Project. At 212 acres, it’s one of the largest water treatment plants in the U.S. It provides nearly half of Orange County’s total water 
supply. Water flowing from Diemer meets or surpasses all state and federal regulations and it is kept safe from the treatment plant to 
your tap by constant testing throughout the distribution network. This constant surveillance ensures your drinking water stays within 
the requirements mandated by the federal Safe Drinking Water Act.
 Lead Service Line Inventory
S
MWD’s lead and copper service line inventory can be 
found at smwd.com/553/Lead-FAQ.
3
Water Conservation: Making Every 
Drop Count
W
ater is a limited natural resource, and using it efficiently 
is essential in both wet and dry years. Outdoor watering 
makes up about 60 percent of home water use, making it the 
biggest opportunity for savings.
Start Outdoors: Use Water Wisely in Your Yard
• Choose water-wise plants and drought-tolerant 
landscaping.
• Adjust sprinklers to avoid watering sidewalks and streets.
• Water in the early morning or late evening to reduce 
evaporation.
• Fix leaks in irrigation systems—a small leak can waste 
thousands of gallons per year.
• Use mulch to retain moisture and keep plants healthy.
• Visit smwd.com/179/Rebate-Programs for more 
landscaping ideas and rebates.
Indoor Water-Saving Tips
• Take shorter showers—a five-minute shower uses much 
less water than a bath.
• T urn off the tap while brushing your teeth, shaving, or 
washing dishes.
• Fix leaks—a dripping faucet or running toilet can waste 
thousands of gallons per year.
• Run dishwashers and washing machines only when full 
to save up to 1,000 gallons per month.
• Keep a pitcher of drinking water in the refrigerator to 
avoid running the tap for cold water.
Monitor and Manage Your Water Use
Many cities offer online water usage tracking to help residents 
monitor their water consumption in real time. By identifying 
leaks and adjusting usage habits, homeowners can save both 
water and money.
Why Conservation Matters
Southern California’s arid climate and reliance on imported water 
make conservation essential. Water is transported hundreds of 
miles through aqueducts from the Colorado River and Northern 
California, with high costs for pumping and treatment.
Small Actions, Big Impact
By making small changes in daily habits and using water 
more efficiently, we can protect this vital resource for future 
generations.
T o learn more about Water Conservation & Rebate 
Information: smwd.com/conservation.
Disinfectants and Disinfection 
Byproducts
D
isinfection of drinking water was one of the major public 
health advances in the 20th century. Disinfection was a 
major factor in reducing waterborne disease epidemics caused 
by pathogenic bacteria and viruses, and it remains an essential 
part of drinking water treatment today.
Water imported from IRWD and MWDSC contain 
chloramines, a combination of chlorine and ammonia, as a 
drinking water disinfectant. Chloramines are effective killers 
of bacteria and other micro organisms that may cause diseases.
Chlorine disinfection has almost completely eliminated from 
our lives the risks of microbial waterborne diseases. Chlorine 
is added to your drinking water at the source (surface water 
treatment plant). Enough chlorine is added so that it does not 
completely dissipate through the distribution system pipes. This 
chlorine helps to prevent the growth of bacteria in the pipes that 
carry drinking water from the source into your home.
However, chlorine can react with naturally-occurring materials 
in the water to form unintended chemical byproducts, called 
disinfection byproducts (DBPs), which may pose health risks. 
A major challenge is how to balance the risks from microbial 
pathogens and DBPs. It is important to provide protection 
from these microbial pathogens while simultaneously ensuring 
decreasing health risks from disinfection byproducts. The Safe 
Drinking Water Act requires the USEPA to develop rules to 
achieve these goals.
T rihalomethanes (THMs) and Haloacetic Acids (HAAs) are the 
most common and most studied DBPs found in drinking water 
treated with chlorine. In 1979, the USEPA set the maximum 
amount of total THMs allowed in drinking water at 100 parts 
per billion as an annual running average. Effective in January 
2002, the Stage 1 Disinfectants / Disinfection Byproducts 
Rule lowered the total THM maximum contaminant level to 
80 parts per billion and added HAAs to the list of regulated 
chemicals in drinking water.
Stage 2 of the regulation was finalized by USEPA in 2006, 
which further controls allowable levels of DBPs in drinking 
water without compromising disinfection itself. A required 
distribution system evaluation was completed in 2008 and 
a Stage 2 monitoring plan has been approved by DDW . 
Full Stage 2 compliance began in 2012. Your drinking 
water complies with the Stage 2 Disinfectants / Disinfection 
Byproducts Rule.
Chloramines form less disinfectant by-products. People who 
use dialysis machines may want to take special precautions and 
consult their physician for appropriate type of water treatment. 
Customers who maintain fish ponds, tanks or aquaria should 
also make necessary adjustments in water quality treatment, as 
these disinfectants are toxic to fish.
4
2025 SANTA MARGARITA WATER DISTRICT DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM WATER QUALITY
MCL (MRDL/
MRDLG)
AVERAGE 
AMOUNT
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS
MCL
VIOLATION TYPICAL SOURCE OF CONTAMINANT
Disinfection Byproducts
Chlorine Residual (ppm) (4 / 4) 1.83 1.61 - 1.99 No Disinfectant Added for Treatment
Haloacetic Acids (ppb) 60 8 4.1 - 10 No Byproducts of Chlorine Disinfection
Total Trihalomethanes (ppb) 80 32 20 - 37 No Byproducts of Chlorine Disinfection
Aesthetic Quality
Color (color units) 15* 1 1 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Odor (threshold odor number) 3* 1 1 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Specific Conductance (µmho/cm) 1,600* 926 445 - 1,102 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Turbidity (NTU) 5* 0.07 0.01 - 0.50 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Total Dissolved Solids (ppm) 1,000* 614 510 - 680 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Unregulated Chemicals - Tested in 2025
Alkalinity, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated 113 98 - 130 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated 256 210 - 300 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total (grains/gallon) Not Regulated 15 12.3 - 17.5 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
pH (pH units) Not Regulated 7.59 6.93 - 8.52 N/A Hydrogen Ion Concentration
Sodium (ppm) Not Regulated 95 83 - 110 N/A Salt Present in Water; Naturally Occuring
Eight locations in the distribution system are tested quarterly for total trihalomethanes and haloacetic acids; forty-three locations are tested monthly for color, odor, and 
turbidity, and weekly for coliform bacteria. MRDL = Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level; MRDLG = Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level Goal;  
*Contaminant is regulated by a secondary standard to maintain aesthetic qualities (taste, odor, color).
2025 Santa Margarita Water District Drinking Water Quality
LEAD AND COPPER ACTION LEVELS AT RESIDENTIAL TAPS
ACTION 
LEVEL (AL)
PUBLIC 
HEALTH GOAL
90TH PERCENTILE
VALUE
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS
SITES EXCEEDING AL 
/ NUMBER OF SITES
AL
VIOLATION?
TYPICAL SOURCE OF 
CONTAMINANT
Copper (ppm) 1.3 0.3 0.079 ND - 0.16 0 / 52 No Corrosion of Household Plumbing
Lead (ppb) 15 0.2 ND ND 0 / 52 No Corrosion of Household Plumbing
Every three years, at least 50 residences are tested for lead and copper at-the tap. Santa Margarita Water District tested 52 homes in the most recent set of samples 
collected in 2024.  Lead was not detected in any sample. Copper was detected in 15 samples; none exceeded the Action Level (AL).  A regulatory action level is the 
concentration of a contaminant which, if exceeded, triggers treatment or other requirements that a water system must follow.
MICROBIOLOGICAL MCL MCLG
HIGHEST NUMBER OF 
DETECTIONS
NO. OF MONTHS 
IN VIOLATION TYPICAL SOURCE OF BACTERIA
E. coli (a) 0 0 0 Human and animal fecal waste
(a) Routine and repeat samples are total coliform-positive and either is E. coli-positive or system fails to take repeat samples following E. coli-positive routine sample or 
system fails to analyze total coliform-positive repeat sample for E. coli.
5
ppb = parts per billion; ppm = parts per million; pCi/L = picoCuries per liter; µmho/cm = micromhos per centimeter; NTU = nephelometric turbidity units; MCL = Maximum 
Contaminant Level;  PHG = California Public Health Goal; MCLG = federal MCL Goal;  MRDL = Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level; MRDLG = Maximum Residual 
Disinfectant Level Goal; NL = Notification Level;  N/A = not applicable; TT = treatment technique. 
* Chemical is regulated by a secondary standard.
** On January 21, 2025, a higher than normal (7 NTU) grab sample result was reported. This value is inconsistent with the continuous online analyzer which showed 
a reading of 0.0259 NTU at the same time that the grab sample was taken. The available evidence suggests that the higher than normal grab sample was not a valid 
representation of the water quality produced by the plant at the time. No other result above 0.1 NTU was reported throughout the year.
2025 IRVINE RANCH WATER DISTRICT BAKER WATER TREATMENT PLANT
 CHEMICAL MCL PHG
AVERAGE 
AMOUNT
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS
MCL
VIOLATION? TYPICAL SOURCE OF CHEMICAL
Radiologicals - Tested in 2025
Uranium (pCi/L) 20 0.43 1.9 1.9 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Inorganic Chemicals - Tested in 2025
Arsenic (ppb) 10 0.004 ND ND - 2.2 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Barium (ppm) 1 2 0.129 0.119 - 0.141 No Refinery Discharge, Erosion of Natural 
Deposits
Fluoride (ppm) 2.0 1 0.33 0.27 - 0.37 No Erosion of Natural Deposits; Water Additive 
for Dental Health
Secondary Standards* - Tested in 2025
Chloride (ppm) 500* N/A 109 108 - 110 No Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Odor (threshold odor number) 3* N/A 1 ND - 3 No Naturally-occurring Organic Materials
Specific Conductance (µmho/cm) 1,600* N/A 1,049 1,030 - 1,068 No Substances that Form Ions in Water
Sulfate (ppm) 500* N/A 219 217 - 221 No Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Total Dissolved Solids (ppm) 1,000* N/A 625 560 - 682 No Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Turbidity (NTU) 5* N/A 0.25 ND - 7** No Soil Runoff
Unregulated Chemicals - Tested in 2025         
Alkalinity, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 119 106 - 129 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Boron (ppm) NL = 1 N/A 0.143 0.13 - 0.186 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Calcium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 73 65 - 81.3 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total as CaCO3  (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 293 269 - 322 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total (grains/gallon) Not Regulated N/A 17 16 - 19 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Lithium (ppb) Not Regulated N/A 65.7 64.2 - 67.2 N/A Various Natural and Man-made Sources
Magnesium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 26.9 26 - 28.8 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
pH (pH units) Not Regulated N/A 7.6 7 - 8 N/A Hydrogen Ion Concentration
Potassium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 5.4 4.9 - 6 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Sodium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 101 96.9 - 106 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Total Organic Carbon (ppm) TT N/A 2.9 2.9 N/A Various Natural and Man-made Sources
IRVINE RANCH WATER DISTRICT BAKER WATER 
TREATMENT PLANT
TREATMENT 
TECHNIQUE
TURBIDITY 
MEASUREMENTS
TT 
VIOLATION?
TYPICAL SOURCE IN DRINKING 
WATER
Turbidity - combined filter effluent
1) Highest single turbidity measurement (NTU) 0.1 0.030 No Soil Runoff
2) Percentage of samples less than or equal to 0.3 NTU 95% 100% No Soil Runoff
Turbidity is a measure of the cloudiness of the water, an indication of particulate matter, some of which might include harmful microorganisms. Low turbidity in the 
treated water is a good indicator of effective filtration.  Filtration is called a “treatment technique” (TT).  A treatment technique is a required process intended to reduce 
the level of chemicals in drinking water that are difficult and sometimes impossible  to measure directly. NTU = nephelometric turbidity units
UNREGULATED CHEMICALS REQUIRING MONITORING
CHEMICAL
NOTIFICATION 
LEVEL PHG
AVERAGE 
AMOUNT
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS MOST RECENT SAMPLING DATE
Lithium (ppb) N/A N/A 38 30 - 47 2025
6
2025 METROPOLITAN WATER DISTRICT OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA TREATED SURFACE WATER
CONSTITUENT MCL
PHG 
(MCLG) 
AVERAGE 
AMOUNT
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS
MCL 
VIOLATION? TYPICAL SOURCE IN DRINKING WATER
 Radiologicals - Tested in 2023 and 2025
Gross Alpha Particle Activity (pCi/L) 15 (0) ND ND - 5 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Gross Beta Particle Activity (pCi/L) 50 (0) ND ND - 6 No Decay of Natural and Man-made Deposits
Uranium (pCi/L) 20 0.43 1 ND - 3 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Inorganic Chemicals - Tested in 2025
Aluminum (ppm) 1 0.6 0.058 ND - 0.082 No Treatment Process Residue, Natural Deposits
Barium (ppm) 1 2 0.13 0.13 No Refinery Discharge, Erosion of Natural Deposits
Bromate (ppb) 10 0.1 2.4 ND - 8.4 No Byproduct of Drinking Water Ozonation
Fluoride (ppm) 2 1 0.7 0.6 - 0.8 No Water Additive for Dental Health
Secondary Standards* - Tested in 2025
Aluminum (ppb) 200* 600 58 ND - 82 No Treatment Process Residue, Natural Deposits
Chloride (ppm) 500* N/A 92 84 - 99 No Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Color (color units) 15* N/A 1 1 No Naturally-occurring Organic Materials
Specific Conductance (µmho/cm) 1,600* N/A 873 759 - 987 No Substances that Form Ions in Water
Sulfate (ppm) 500* N/A 182 146 - 218 No Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Total Dissolved Solids (ppm) 1,000* N/A 545 465 - 625 No Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Unregulated Chemicals - Tested in 2025
Alkalinity, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 108 93 - 122 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Boron (ppm) NL=1 N/A 0.13 0.13 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Calcium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 56 44 - 68 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 236 191 - 280 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total (grains/gal) Not Regulated N/A 14 11 - 16 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Magnesium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 22 19 - 25 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
pH (pH units) Not Regulated N/A 8.3 8.2 - 8.3 N/A Hydrogen Ion Concentration
Potassium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 4.3 3.8 - 4.8 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Sodium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 88 78 - 97 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Total Organic Carbon (ppm) TT N/A 2.4 1.6 - 2.6 N/A Various Natural and Man-made Sources
ppb = parts per billion; ppm = parts per million; pCi/L = picoCuries per liter; µmho/cm = micromhos per centimeter; ND = not detected; MCL = Maximum Contaminant 
Level; (MCLG) = Federal  MCL Goal; PHG = California Public Health Goal; NL = Notification Level;  N/A = not applicable; TT = treatment technique. * Chemical is 
regulated by a secondary standard.
UNREGULATED CHEMICALS REQUIRING MONITORING
CHEMICAL
NOTIFICATION 
LEVEL PHG
AVERAGE 
AMOUNT
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS MOST RECENT SAMPLING DATE
Lithium (ppb) N/A N/A 38 30 - 47 2025
METROPOLITAN WATER DISTRICT  
DIEMER FILTRATION PLANT
TREATMENT 
TECHNIQUE
TURBIDITY 
MEASUREMENTS
TT 
VIOLATION?
TYPICAL SOURCE IN DRINKING 
WATER
Turbidity - combined filter effluent
1) Highest single turbidity measurement (NTU) 0.3 0.05 No Soil Runoff
2) Percentage of samples less than or equal to 0.3 NTU 95% 100% No Soil Runoff
Turbidity is a measure of the cloudiness of the water, an indication of particulate matter, some of which might include harmful microorganisms. Low turbidity in 
Metropolitan’s treated water is a good indicator of effective filtration.  Filtration is called a “treatment technique” (TT).  A treatment technique is a required process 
intended to reduce the level of chemicals in drinking water that are difficult and sometimes impossible  to measure directly. NTU = nephelometric turbidity units
7
Drinking Water Definitions
What are water quality standards? 
Drinking water standards established by U.S. EPA and DDW set limits 
for substances that may affect consumer health or aesthetic qualities 
of drinking water.
The tables in this report show the following types of water quality 
standards:
• Maximum contaminant level (MCL): The highest level of a 
contaminant that is allowed in drinking water. Primary MCLs 
are set as close to the PHGs (or MCLGs) as is economically and 
technologically feasible.
• Maximum residual disinfectant level (MRDL): The highest level 
of a disinfectant allowed in drinking water. There is convincing 
evidence that addition of a disinfectant is necessary for control 
of microbial contaminants.
• Secondary MCLs are set to protect the odor, taste, and 
appearance of drinking water. 
• Primary drinking water standard: MCLs for contaminants 
that affect health, along with their monitoring and reporting 
requirements and water treatment requirements.  
• Regulatory action level (AL): The concentration of a 
contaminant that, if exceeded, triggers treatment or other 
requirements that a water system must follow. 
What is a water quality goal? 
In addition to mandatory water quality standards, U.S. EPA and 
DDW have set voluntary water quality goals for some contaminants. 
Water quality goals are often set at such low levels that they 
are not achievable in practice and are not directly measurable. 
Nevertheless, these goals provide useful guideposts and direction for 
water management practices.
The tables in this report include three types of water quality goals:
• Maximum contaminant level goal (MCLG): The level of a 
contaminant in drinking water below which there is no known or 
expected risk to health. MCLGs are set by U.S. EPA.
• Maximum residual disinfectant level goal (MRDLG): The level 
of a drinking water disinfectant below which there is no known 
or expected risk to health. MRDLGs do not reflect the benefits of 
the use of disinfectants to control microbial contaminants. 
• Public health goal (PHG): The level of a contaminant in drinking 
water below which there is no known or expected risk to health. 
PHGs are set by the California EPA.  
How are contaminants measured? 
Water is sampled and tested throughout the year. Contaminants are 
measured in:
• Parts per million (ppm) or milligrams per liter (mg/L)
• Parts per billion (ppb) or micrograms per liter (µg/L)
• Parts per trillion (ppt) or nanograms per liter (ng/L)
Source Water Assessments
U
.S. EPA requires water suppliers to complete a source water 
assessment (SWA) that uses information collected in the 
watershed sanitary surveys. MWDSC completed its SWA in 
December 2002. The most recent SWA for IRWD’s Santiago 
Reservoir was updated in 2001. The SWA is used to evaluate 
the vulnerability of water sources to contamination and helps 
determine whether more protective measures are needed.
Every five years, water suppliers are required by DDW to 
examine possible sources of drinking water contamination 
in their water sources. The watershed sanitary survey for 
MWDSC’s Colorado River supply was recently updated 
in 2022; the survey for the State Water Project supply was 
updated in 2021. The IRWD’s watershed sanitary survey for 
Santiago Reservoir (Irvine Lake) was updated in 2025. Water 
from the Colorado River is considered to be most vulnerable 
to contamination from recreation, urban/stormwater runoff, 
increasing urbanization in the watershed, and wastewater. 
Water supplies from Northern California’s State Water 
Project are most vulnerable to contamination from urban/
stormwater runoff, wildlife, agriculture, recreation, and 
wastewater. Water supplies from the Santiago Reservoir 
are most vulnerable to contamination from septic systems 
and wildfires. Copies of the most recent summary of the 
watershed sanitary surveys or the SWAs can be obtained by 
calling SMWD Customer Care at (949) 459-6420.
Where Can You Learn More?
T
here’s a wealth of information on the 
internet about drinking water quality 
and water issues in general. Some good sites 
to begin your research are:
• Metropolitan Water District  
of Southern California:  
mwdh2o.com
• California Department of  
Water Resources:  
water.ca.gov
• The Water Education 
Foundation: watereducation.org
T o learn more about Water Conservation & Rebate 
Information:
• smwd.com/conservation
T o see the aqueducts in action, check out these two 
videos:
• Wings Over Water: youtu.be/8A1v1Rr2neU
• Wings Over Metropolitan's Colorado River 
Aqueduct: youtu.be/KipMQh5t0f4
8
Have you ever wondered where your water comes from? Here 
at Santa Margarita Water District, our water is surface water 
imported by the MWDSC and IRWD. MWDSC’s imported 
water sources are the Colorado River and the State Water Project, 
which draws water from the Sacramento-San Joaquin River 
Delta. Water from Northern California travels to us through a 
complex delivery system known as the California State Water 
Project. Designed and built in the 1960s, the State Water 
Project is one of the largest public water and power utilities in 
the world, providing drinking water for more than 25 million 
people statewide. Managed by the California Department of 
Water Resources, the project stretches over 700 miles from 
Lake Oroville in the north to Lake Perris in the south. Water 
stored in Lake Oroville, Folsom Lake, and other tributaries and 
fed by snowmelt from the Sierra Nevada Mountains flows into 
the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers, and from there into 
reservoirs in the Bay-Delta region. From the Bay-Delta, giant 
pumps lift the water into the 444-mile-long California Aqueduct, 
from which it flows southward to cities and farms in Central 
and Southern California. Composed mainly of concrete-lined 
canals, the aqueduct includes over 20 miles of tunnels, over 
130 miles of pipelines, and 27 miles of siphons. Along 
the way, the water is pumped 2,882 feet over the 
T ehachapi Mountains. The Edmonston Pumping 
Plant alone lifts millions of gallons a day up 
1,926 feet, the highest single water lift in 
the world. Is it any wonder the State 
Water Project is the largest single 
consumer of power in California? M
anaged by the 
MWDSC, the 
Colorado River Aqueduct 
begins near Parker Dam on the 
Colorado River. There, the Gene 
Pumping Station lifts the water 
over 300 feet as it begins its 
242-mile journey to Lake 
Mathews, just outside the 
City of Corona. Along 
the way, the water passes 
through two reservoirs, five 
pumping stations, 62 miles 
of canals, and 176 miles of 
tunnels, buried conduits, 
and siphons. All told, the 
water is lifted four times, 
for a total of more than 1,300 feet. 
After its journey across the Mojave Desert, the water descends 
into the Coachella Valley and through the San Gorgonio 
Pass. Near Cabazon, the aqueduct flows underground, passing 
beneath the San Jacinto Mountains and continuing until it reaches 
its terminus at Lake Mathews. From there, 156 miles of distribution 
lines, along with eight more tunnels and five drinking water treatment 
plants, deliver treated water throughout Southern California.
Where Does Our Water Comes From? And How Does it Get to Us?
9
What Causes the Pink Stain on 
Bathroom Fixtures?
T
he reddish-pink color frequently 
noted in bathrooms on shower 
stalls, tubs, tile, toilets, sinks, and 
toothbrush holders and on pets' water 
bowls is caused by the growth of 
the bacterium Serratia marcescens. 
Serratia is commonly isolated from 
soil, water, plants, insects, and verte -
brates (including humans). The bac -
teria can be introduced into the house 
through any of the above-mentioned sources. The bathroom 
provides a perfect environment (moist and warm) for bacte -
ria to thrive. 
The best solution to this problem is to clean and dry these 
surfaces to keep them free from bacteria. Chlorine-based 
compounds work best, but keep in mind that abrasive 
cleaners may scratch fixtures, making them more susceptible 
to bacterial growth. Chlorine bleach can be used periodically 
to disinfect the toilet and help eliminate the occurrence 
of the pink residue. Keeping bathtubs and sinks wiped 
down using a solution that contains chlorine will also help 
to minimize its occurrence. Serratia will not survive in 
chlorinated drinking water.
Tip T op Tap
T
he most common signs that your faucet or sink is affecting the quality of your drinking water are discolored water, sink or faucet 
stains, a buildup of particles, unusual odors or tastes, and a reduced flow of water. The solutions to these problems may be in 
your hands. 
Kitchen Sink and Drain 
Handwashing, soap scum buildup, and the handling of raw meats and vegetables can contaminate your sink. Clogged drains can lead 
to unclean sinks and backed-up water in which bacteria (i.e., pink or black slime growth) can grow and contaminate the sink area and 
faucet, causing a rotten egg odor. Disinfect and clean the sink and drain area regularly and flush with hot water. 
Faucets, Screens, and Aerators 
Chemicals and bacteria can splash and accumulate on the faucet screen and aerator, which are located on the tip of faucets and can 
collect particles like sediment and minerals, resulting in a decreased flow from the faucet. Clean and disinfect the aerators or screens 
on a regular basis. Check with your plumber if you find particles in the faucet screen, as they could be pieces of plastic from the hot 
water heater dip tube. Faucet gaskets can break down and cause black, oily slime. If you find this slime, replace the faucet gasket with a 
higher-quality product. White scaling or hard deposits on faucets and showerheads may be caused by water with high levels of calcium 
carbonate. Clean these fixtures with vinegar or use water softening to reduce the calcium carbonate levels for the hot water system. 
Water Filtration/Treatment Devices 
A smell of rotten eggs can be a sign of bacteria on the filters or in the treatment system. The system can also become clogged over 
time, so regular filter replacement is important. (Remember to replace your refrigerator filter!)
Q&A
Why can tap water have a taste?
Taste in drinking water is usually related to naturally occurring 
minerals, disinfectants, or seasonal changes in source water. 
While these characteristics may affect taste, they do not 
typically indicate a health risk.
Why is water sometimes called the “original energy drink”?
Water helps regulate body temperature, supports digestion, 
and keeps joints moving—without sugar, calories, or caffeine.
Can weather affect drinking water quality?
Heavy rain, drought, or seasonal changes can influence 
source water conditions. Water systems adjust treatment 
processes as needed to maintain water quality during changing 
environmental conditions.
Why is maintaining water infrastructure important?
Pipes, pumps, and treatment facilities are critical for delivering 
safe drinking water. Regular maintenance and upgrades help 
prevent leaks, breaks, and service disruptions.
What can customers do to help protect water quality?
Customers can help by reporting leaks, avoiding cross-
connections, maintaining household plumbing, and staying 
informed through their annual water quality report.
10
Drinking Water Fluoridation
F
luoride has been added to U.S. drinking water supplies since 1945 to help prevent tooth decay. As of today, the majority 
of public water suppliers in the country, including the MWDSC, fluoridate their water. MWDSC began adding fluo -
ride in December 2007, complying with all provisions of California’s fluoridation system requirements. Fluoride levels in 
drinking water are regulated in California and limited to a maximum of 2 parts per million (ppm). Some local groundwater 
supplies naturally contain fluoride, but they are not supplemented with additional fluoride.
Additional Information
For more details on water fluoridation, please visit:
• U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC):  cdc.gov/fluoridation or (800) 232-4636
• State Water Resources Control Board, Division of Drinking Water:   
waterboards.ca.gov/drinking_water/certlic/drinkingwater/Fluoridation.html
• American Dental Association:  ada.org
• American Water Works Association:  awwa.org
For specific inquiries about MWDSC’s fluoridation program, please contact MWDSC directly at (800) 225-5693.
Santa Margarita Water District
26111 Antonio Parkway 
Rancho Santa Margarita, CA 92688
(949) 459-6420 • smwd.com
T otal Dissolved Solids, Alkalinity, and Hardness
T
otal dissolved solids (TDS) are an indicator of the aesthetic characteristics of drinking water and a 
gauge of a broad array of chemical constituents within the water. It is a measure of all the com -
bined inorganic and organic substances, and while it is not associated with any health effects, TDS 
can impact the appearance and taste of water.
TDS is mainly inorganic salts, as well as a small amount of organic matter. Common 
inorganic salts found in water include calcium, magnesium, potassium and sodium, along 
with nitrates, chlorides, and sulfates. These minerals originate from a variety of sources, 
both natural and caused by human activity.
Alone, dissolved solids are usually not a health hazard. Some people buy mineral water, 
which has naturally elevated levels of dissolved solids. The U.S. EPA includes TDS as 
a secondary standard, a voluntary guideline for aesthetic and cosmetic effects. Kept 
within the established guidelines, TDS can impart a favorable taste to water. T oo little 
can give water a flat taste. There are issues, however, with high levels of TDS. Increased 
TDS concentrations can produce hard water, which stains household fixtures, corrodes 
pipes, and imparts a metallic taste. Within the SMWD system, you can be assured that 
TDS is kept well within the State of California’s established secondary standard.
T otal  
Dissolved Solids
Average Amount: 614 mg/L
Range: 510 - 680  mg/L
Alkalinity
Average Amount: 113 mg/L
Range: 98 - 130 mg/L
Hardness
Average Amount: 256 mg/L
Range: 210 - 300 mg/L
11
