
Your 2024 Water Quality ReportYour 2024 Water Quality Report
S
ince 1990, California public water utilities have been providing an annual  
Water Quality Report to their customers. This year’s report covers calendar 
year 2023 drinking water quality testing and reporting. 
Santa Margarita Water District (SMWD) vigilantly safeguards its water supply 
and, as in years past, the water delivered to your home meets or surpasses the  
quality standards required by federal and state regula tory agencies. The U.S.  
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) and the State Water Resources  
Control Board, Division of Drinking Water  
(DDW) are the agencies responsible for  
establishing and enforcing drinking water  
quality standards. 
The Irvine Ranch Water District (IRWD) and Metropolitan Water District of Southern  
California (MWDSC) supply treated imported surface w ater to SMWD and test for unregulated 
chemicals in our water supply. Unregulated chemical  
monitoring helps USEPA and DDW determine where certain
chemicals occur and whether new standards need to be  
established for those chemicals to protect public health. 
Through drinking water quality testing programs carried out 
by IRWD and MWDSC for treated surface water and the  
SMWD for the distribution system, your drinking water is  
constantly monitored from source to tap for regulated and  
unregulated constituents. In most cases, SMWD goes beyond 
what is required by more frequent testing on chemicals that  
may have known health risks but do not have drinking water  
standards. The State allows us to monitor for some contami -
nants less than once per year because the concen tra tions of 
these contaminants do not change frequent ly. Some of our  
data, though more than one year old, are representative. 
/ornament23 
This report contains important information 
about your drinking water. 
T ranslate it, or speak with someone who understands it. 
/ornament23 
Este informe contiene información muy importante 
sobre su agua potable.  
Tradúzcalo o hable con alguien que lo entienda bien.
Quality Water is Our Priority
T
urn the tap and the water flows, as  
if by magic. Or so it seems. The  
reality is considerably different, however. 
Delivering high-quality drinking water to 
our customers is a scientific and engineer -
ing feat that requires considerable effort 
and talent to ensure the water is always 
available to drink. 
Because tap water is highly regulated by state and federal laws, 
water treatment and distribution operators must be licensed and 
are required to complete on-the-job training and technical  
education before becoming a state certified operator.  
Our licensed water professionals have an understanding of a 
wide range of subjects, including mathematics, biology, chemistry, 
physics, and engineering. Some of the tasks they complete on a  
regular basis include: 
S Operating and maintaining equipment to maintain water
quality;
S Monitoring and inspecting machinery, meters, gauges, and
operating conditions;
S Conducting tests and inspections on water and evaluating
the results;
S Documenting and reporting test results and system
operations to regulatory agencies; and
S Serving our community through customer support ,
education, and outreach.
So, the next time you turn on your faucet, think of the skilled  
professionals who stand behind every drop.
~ 2 ~
In order to ensure that tap water is safe to drink, USEPA and  
the DDW prescribe regulations that limit the amount of certain  
contaminants in water provided by public water systems. 
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration regulations and  
California law also establish limits for contaminants in bottled  
water that must provide the same protection for public health.  
Drinking water, including bottled water, may  
reasonably be expected to contain at least  
small amounts of some contami nants. The  
presence of contami nants does not necessarily 
indicate that water poses a health risk. 
More information about contaminants and  
potential health effects can be  obtained by  
calling the   USEPA’s Safe Drinking Water  
Hotline at (800)  426-4791. or check their  
website at: www.epa.gov/safewater. 
Drinking Water Fluoridation 
Fluoride has been added to U.S. drinking  
water supplies since 1945. Of the 50 largest  
cities in the U.S., 43 fluoridate their drinking water. 
In December 2007,  
MWDSC joined a majority 
of the nation’s public  
water suppliers in adding  
fluoride to drink ing water  
in order to prevent tooth  
decay. MWDSC was in  
compli ance with all  
provisions of the State's  
fluori dation system require ments. Fluoride levels in drinking  
water are limited under California state regulations at a  
maximum dosage of 2 parts per million. 
Additional information about the fluoridation of drinking water 
is available on these websites: 
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
1 (800) 232-4636 S www.cdc.gov/fluoridation/  
State Water Resources Control Board, 
Division of Drinking Water 
www.waterboards.ca.gov/ drinking_water/ 
certlic/ drinkingwater/Fluoridation.html 
For more information about MWDSC’s fluori dation program, 
please contact Edgar G. Dymally at (213) 217 -5709 or at  
edymally@mwdh2o.com. 
Sources of Supply 
Your drinking water consists of imported treated surface water 
from MWDSC, as well as treated surface water from IRWD’s  
Baker Water Treatment Plant, which utilizes surface water from 
both MWDSC and Santiago Reservoir (Irvine Lake). MWDSC’s  
imported water sources are the Colorado River and the State  
Water Project, which draws water from the 
Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta. 
Basic Information About 
Drinking Water Contaminants 
The sources of drinking water (both tap  
water and bottled water) include rivers,  
lakes, streams, ponds, reservoirs, springs  
and wells. As water travels over the surface 
of land or through the layers of the ground  
it dissolves naturally occurring minerals and, 
in some cases, radioactive material, and can 
pick up substances resulting from the  
presence of animal and human activity.  
Contaminants that may be present in source water include: 
S Microbial contaminants, such as viruses and bacteria, which 
may come from sewage treatment plants, septic systems,  
agricultural livestock operations and wildlife. 
S Inorganic contaminants, such as salts and metals, which can 
be natur ally occurring or result from urban storm runoff,  
industrial or domestic wastewater dis charges, oil and gas  
production, mining and farming. 
S Organic chemical con ta m  inants, including syn  thetic and volatile 
organic chemicals, are by-
products of industrial  
processes and petro leum 
production, and can also  
come from gas oline  
stations, urban storm water 
runoff, agricultural appli -
 cation and septic systems. 
S Radioactive contaminants, which can be naturally occurring  
or be the result of oil and gas production or mining activities. 
S Pesticides and herbicides, which may come from a variety of 
sources such as agriculture, urban storm  water runoff and  
residential uses.
Constant Monitoring Ensures Continued ExcellenceConstant Monitoring Ensures Continued Excellence
~ 3 ~
To Safeguard Against Issues that May Affect Your Health 
We Comply with All State & Federal Water Quality Regulations
Disinfectants and Disinfection Byproducts 
Disinfection of drinking water was one of the major public  
health advances in the 20 th century. Disinfection was a major  
factor in reducing waterborne disease epidemics caused by  
pathogenic bacteria and viruses, and it remains an essential part 
of drinking water treatment today. 
Water imported from IRWD and MWDSC contain chloramines, 
a combination of chlorine and ammonia, as a drink ing water  
disinfect ant. Chloramines are effective killers of bacteria and  
other micro organisms that may cause diseases. 
Chlorine disinfection has almost completely elimi nated from 
our lives the risks of microbial water borne diseases. Chlorine is 
added to your drinking water at the source (surface water  
treatment plant). Enough chlorine  
is added so that it does not  
completely dissipate through the  
distribution system pipes.  This  
chlorine helps to prevent the  
growth of bacteria in the pipes that 
carry drinking water from the  
source into your home. 
However, chlorine can react  
with naturally-occur ring materials 
in the water to form unintended  
chemical byproducts, called disinfec  tion byproducts (DBPs),  
which may pose health risks. A major challenge is how to balance 
the risks from micro bial pathogens and DBPs. It is important to 
provide protection from these microbial pathogens while  
simultaneously ensuring decreasing health risks from disinfection 
byproducts. The Safe Drinking Water Act requires the USEPA to 
develop rules to achieve these goals. 
Trihalomethanes (THMs) and Haloacetic Acids (HAAs) are  
the most common and most studied DBPs found in drinking  
water treated with chlorine. In 1979, the USEPA set the maximum 
amount of total THMs allowed in drinking water at 100 parts per 
billion as an annual running average. Effective in January 2002,  
the Stage 1 Disinfectants / Disinfection Byproducts Rule lowered 
the total THM maximum 
contaminant level to 80  
parts per billion and  
added HAAs to the list  
of regulated chemicals in 
drinking water.  
Stage 2 of the regula -
tion was finalized by  
USEPA in 2006, which  
further controls allowable levels of DBPs in drinking water  
without compromising disinfection itself. A required distribution 
system evaluation was completed in 2008 and a Stage 2  
monitoring plan has been approved by DDW. Full  Stage 2  
compliance began in 2012. Your drinking water complies with the 
Stage 2 Disinfectants / Disinfection Byproducts Rule. 
Chloramines form less disinfectant by-products. People who  
use dialysis machines may want to take special pre cautions and 
consult their physician for appropriate type of water treatment.  
Customers who maintain fish ponds, tanks or aquaria should also 
make necessary adjustments in water quality treatment, as these 
disinfectants are toxic to fish.
Immunocompromised People 
Some people may be more vulner able to  
contami  nants in drinking water than the general  
population. Immuno-compromised people, such as 
those with cancer who are undergoing chemo -
therapy, persons who have had organ trans plants,  
people with HIV / AIDS or 
other immune system  
disorders, some elderly  
persons and infants can  
be particularly at risk  
from infections. These  
people should seek  
advice about drinking  
water from their health  
care providers.
Cryptosporidium 
Cryptosporidium is a microscopic organism  that, 
when ingested, can cause diarrhea, fever, and other 
gastrointestinal symptoms. The organism comes  
from animal and/ or human wastes and may be in  
surface water. MWDSC tested their source water  
and treated surface water for Crypto sporidium in  
2023 but did not detect it. As a safe guard,  
Cryptosporidium is elimi nated from the water using 
an effective treatment combi nation includ ing sedimen tation, filtration, and 
disinfection. 
The USEPA and the federal Centers for Disease Control guide lines on  
appropriate means to lessen the risk of infection by Cryptosporidium  and 
other microbial contaminants are available from USEPA’s Safe Drinking  
Water hotline at (800) 426-4791 between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. Eastern Time 
(7 a.m. to 1 p.m. in California).
~ 4 ~
Table Legend 
What is a Water Quality Goal? 
In addition to mandatory water quality standards, USEPA and the DDW have set voluntary 
water quality goals for some contaminants.  Water quality goals are often set at such low  
levels that they are not achiev able in practice and are not directly measurable. Nevertheless, 
these goals provide useful guidance and directions for water manage ment practices. 
The charts in this report include three types of water quality goals: 
S Maximum Contaminant Level Goal (MCLG): The level of a contami nant in drinking water 
below which there is no known or expected risk to health. MCLGs are set by the USEPA. 
S Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level Goal (MRDLG): The level of a disinfectant added 
for water treatment below which there is no known or expected risk to health. MRDLGs 
are set by USEPA. 
S Public Health Goals (PHG): The level of a contaminant in drinking water below which  
there is no known or expected risk to health. PHGs are set by the California Environmental 
Protection Agency – Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment.
What are Water Quality Standards? 
Drinking water standards established by the USEPA and DDW set limits for sub stances that may affect 
consumer health or aesthetic qualities of drinking water. The charts in this report show the following 
types of water quality standards: 
S Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL): The highest level of a contaminant that is allowed in  
drinking water. Primary MCLs are set as close to the PHGs (or MCLGs) as is economically and  
technologically feasible. 
S Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level (MRDL): The level of a disinfectant added for water  
treatment that may not be exceeded at the consumer’s tap. 
S Secondary MCLs are set to protect the odor, taste, and appearance of drinking water. 
S Primary Drinking Water Standard:  MCLs for contaminants that affect health  along with their  
monitoring and reporting requirements and water treatment requirements. 
S Regulatory Action Level (AL): The concentration of a contaminant which, if exceeded, triggers 
treatment or other requirements that a water system must follow. 
S Treatment Technique (TT): A required process intended to reduce the level of chemicals in  
drinking water that are difficult and sometimes impossible to measure directly.
2023 Metropolitan Water District of Southern California Treated Surface Water 
PHG Average Range of MCL Typical Source 
 Chemical MCL (MCLG) Amount Detections            Violation?           of Chemical 
Radiologicals – Tested in 2023 
Gross Alpha Particle Activity (pCi/L) 15 (0) ND ND – 5 No Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Gross Beta Particle Activity (pCi/L) 50 (0) ND ND – 6 No Decay of Natural and Man-made Deposits 
Uranium (pCi/L) 20 0.43 1 ND – 3 No Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Inorganic Chemicals – Tested in 2023 
Aluminum (ppm) 1 0.6 0.105 ND – 0.07 No Treatment Process Residue, Natural Deposits 
Bromate (ppb) 10 0.1 ND ND – 6.3 No Byproduct of Drinking Water Ozonation 
Fluoride (ppm) 2 1 0.7 0.6 – 0.8 No Water Additive for Dental Health 
Nitrate (as Nitrogen) (ppm) 10 10 0.7 0.7 No Fertilizers, Septic Tanks 
Secondary Standards* – Tested in 2023 
Aluminum (ppb) 200* 600 105 ND – 70 No Treatment Process Residue, Natural Deposits 
Chloride (ppm) 500* n/a 66 42 – 91 No Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Color (color units) 15* n/a 2 1 – 2 No Naturally-occurring Organic Materials 
Odor (threshold odor number) 3* n/a 2 2 No Naturally-occurring Organic Materials 
Specific Conductance (µmho/cm) 1,600* n/a 642 424 – 859 No Substances that Form Ions in Water 
Sulfate (ppm) 500* n/a 122 70 – 175 No Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Total Dissolved Solids (ppm) 1,000* n/a 394 253 – 534 No Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Unregulated Chemicals – Tested in 2023 
Alkalinity, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated              n/a 84 66 – 102 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Boron (ppm) NL = 1 n/a 0.13 0.13 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Calcium (ppm) Not Regulated              n/a 38 25 – 52 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Hardness, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated              n/a 160 99 – 220 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Hardness, total (grains/gallon) Not Regulated              n/a 9.4 5.8 – 13 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Lithium (ppb) Not Regulated              n/a 15 ND – 30 n/a Various Natural and Man-made Sources 
Magnesium (ppm) Not Regulated              n/a 15 9.6 – 21 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
pH (pH units) Not Regulated              n/a 8.5 8.5 n/a Hydrogen Ion Concentration 
Potassium (ppm) Not Regulated              n/a 3.4 2.6 – 4.3 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Sodium (ppm) Not Regulated              n/a 69 47 – 91 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Total Organic Carbon (ppm) TT n/a 2.4 2.1 – 3 n/a Various Natural and Man-made Sources 
ppb = parts per billion; ppm = parts per million; pCi/L = picoCuries per liter; µmho/cm = micromhos per centimeter; ND = not detected; NL = Notification Level;  
MCL = Maximum Contaminant Level; (MCLG) = federal MCL Goal; PHG = California Public Health Goal; n/a = not applicable; TT = treatment technique  
*Chemical is regulated by a secondary standard.
 Turbidity – combined filter effluent Treatment Turbidity TT Typical Source 
 Metropolitan Water District Diemer Filtration Plant Technique Measurements Violation? of Chemical 
1) Highest single turbidity measurement (NTU) 0.3 0.08 No Soil Runoff 
2) Percentage of samples less than or equal to 0.3 NTU 95% 100% No Soil Runoff 
Turbidity is a measure of the cloudiness of the water, an indication of particulate matter, some of which might include harmful microorganisms. NTU = nephelometric turbidity units 
Low turbidity in Metropolitan’s treated water is a good indicator of effective filtration. Filtration is called a ”treatment technique”  (TT).  
A treatment technique is a required process intended to reduce the level of chemicals in drinking water that are difficult and sometimes impossible to measure directly . 
Unregulated Chemicals Requiring Monitoring 
 Chemical Notification Level PHG Average Amount           Range of Detections Most Recent Sampling Date 
Manganese (ppb)** SMCL = 50 n/a 2.2 1.1 – 4.8 2020 
SMCL = Secondary MCL 
**Manganese is regulated with a secondary standard of 50 ppb but was not detected, based on the detection limit for purposes of reporting of 20 ppb .  
Manganese was included as part of the unregulated chemicals requiring monitoring.
~ 5 ~
Source Water Assessments
USEPA requires water suppliers to complete one Source Water 
Assessment (SWA) that utilizes infor ma tion collected in the  
watershed sanitary surveys. MWDSC completed its SWA in  
December 2002. The most recent SWA for IRWD’s 
Santiago Reservoir was completed in 2001. The SWA 
is used to evaluate the vulner ability of water sources 
to contamination and helps deter mine whether more 
protective measures are needed. 
Every five years, water suppliers are required by  
DDW to examine possible sources of drinking water 
contami nation in their water sources. The watershed 
sanitary survey for MWDSC’s Colorado River supply 
was recently updated in 2020 and for the State Water Project  
supply in 2021. The IRWD’s watershed sanitary survey for  
Santiago Reservoir (Irvine Lake) was updated in 2019. 
Water from the Colorado River is considered to be most  
vulnerable to contamination from recreation, urban/stormwater 
runoff, increasing urbanization in the watershed, and 
wastewater. Water supplies from Northern  
California’s State Water Project are most vulnerable 
to contamination from urban/stormwater runoff,  
wild life, agriculture, recreation, and wastewater.  
Water supplies from the Santiago Reservoir are most 
vulnerable to contamination from septic systems  
and wildfires. 
Copies of the most recent summary of either  
Water shed Sanitary Surveys or the SWAs can be  obtained by  
calling SMWD Customer Service at (949) 459-6400.
2023 Irvine Ranch Water District – Baker Water Treatment Plant 
 Chemical                                         MCL        PHG (MCLG)      Avg. Amount     Range of Detections   MCL Violation?       Typical Source of Chemical 
Radiologicals – Tested in 2023 
Gross Alpha Particle Activity (pCi/L)             15                MCLG = 0                     5.4                                  5.4                                  No                    Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Gross Beta Particle Activity (pCi/L)               50                MCLG = 0                    5.13                                5.13                                 No                    Decay of Natural and Man-made Deposits 
Uranium (pCi/L)                                          20                    0.43                          1.7                                  1.7                                  No                    Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Inorganic Chemicals – Tested in 2023 
Arsenic (ppb)                                              10                   0.004                         ND                             ND – 2.31                            No                    Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Barium (ppm)                                               1                        2                            ND                            ND – 0.115                           No                    Refinery Discharge, Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Chlorine Dioxide (ppb)                        MRDL = 800     MRDLG = 800                 50.4                            ND – 600                             No                    Drinking Water Disinfectant Added for Treatment 
Chlorite (ppm)                                            1.0                    0.05                          0.1                            0.06 – 0.13                           No                    Byproduct of Drinking Water Chlorination 
Fluoride (ppm)                                            2.0                      1                           0.32                           0.26 – 0.37                           No                    Erosion of Natural Deposits; 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Water Additive for Dental Health 
Nitrate (as Nitrogen) (ppm)                         10                      10                           ND                             ND – 0.47                            No                    Runoff and Leaching from Fertilizer Use;  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Septic Tank and Sewage; Natural Deposit Erosion 
Secondary Standards* – Tested in 2023 
Chloride (ppm)                                          500*                   n/a                          89.2                           55.5 – 111                            No                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Color (color units)                                      15*                    n/a                           ND                               ND – 5                               No                    Naturally-occurring Organic Materials 
Manganese (ppb)                                       50*                    n/a                          2.74                             ND – 78                              No                    Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Odor (threshold odor number)                     3*                     n/a                            1                                 ND – 3                               No                    Naturally-occurring Organic Materials 
Specific Conductance (µmho/cm)             1,600*                  n/a                         1,001                         918 – 1,085                           No                    Substances that Form Ions in Water 
Sulfate (ppm)                                            500*                   n/a                          217                            187 – 240                            No                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Total Dissolved Solids (ppm)                    1,000*                  n/a                          612                            528 – 672                            No                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Turbidity (NTU)                                           5*                     n/a                           ND                              ND – 0.3                             No                    Soil Runoff 
Unregulated Chemicals – Tested in 2023 
Alkalinity, total as CaCO3 (ppm)         Not Regulated            n/a                          138                            116 – 154                            n/a                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Boron (ppm)                                            NL = 1                  n/a                         0.137                        0.133 – 0.141                         n/a                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Calcium (ppm)                                   Not Regulated            n/a                          74.7                           68.8 – 81.4                           n/a                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Hardness, total as CaCO3 (ppm)         Not Regulated            n/a                          297                            282 – 321                            n/a                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Hardness, total (grains/gallon)            Not Regulated            n/a                           17                               16 – 19                              n/a                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Magnesium (ppm)                              Not Regulated            n/a                          27.9                            25 – 29.9                             n/a                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
pH (pH units)                                     Not Regulated            n/a                            8                               7.5 – 8.5                             n/a                    Hydrogen Ion Concentration 
Potassium (ppm)                                Not Regulated            n/a                          4.18                           4.05 – 4.21                           n/a                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Sodium (ppm)                                    Not Regulated            n/a                          91.6                           74.2 – 112                            n/a                    Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Total Organic Carbon (ppm)                        TT                     n/a                           1.8                                  1.8                                  n/a                    Various Natural and Man-made Sources 
ppb = parts per billion; ppm = parts per million; pCi/L = picoCuries per liter; µmho/cm = micromhos per centimeter; NTU = nephelometric turbidity units; 
MCL = Maximum Contaminant Level; PHG = California Public Health Goal; MCLG = federal MCL Goal; MRDL = Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level;  
MRDLG = Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level Goal; NL = Notification Level; n/a = not applicable; TT = treatment technique  
*Chemical is regulated by a secondary standard. 
 Turbidity – combined filter effluent                                      Treatment                           Turbidity                           TT                      Typical Source 
 Irvine Ranch Water District Baker Water Treatment Plant               Technique                      Measurements                Violation?                of Chemical 
1) Highest single turbidity measurement (NTU)                                                 0.1                                           0.034                                    No                          Soil Runoff 
2) Percentage of samples less than or equal to 0.3 NTU                                  95%                                          100%                                    No                          Soil Runoff 
Turbidity is a measure of the cloudiness of the water, an indication of particulate matter, some of which might include harmful microorganisms.             NTU = nephelometric turbidity units 
Low turbidity in the treated water is a good indicator of effective filtration. Filtration is called a ”treatment technique“ (TT).  
A treatment technique is a required process intended to reduce the level of chemicals in drinking water that are difficult and sometimes impossible to measure directly.
~ 6 ~
About Lead in Tap Water 
If present, elevated levels of lead can cause serious health 
problems, especially for pregnant women and young children. 
Lead in drinking water is primarily from materials and  
components associated with lead 
service lines and home plumbing. 
SMWD is responsible for providing 
high quality drink ing water, but  
cannot control the variety of  
materials used in plumbing  
components. 
When your water has been  
sitting for several hours, you can minimize the potential for  
lead exposure by flushing your tap for 30 seconds to  
2 minutes before using water for drinking or cooking. 
If you are concern ed about lead in your water, you may wish 
to have your water tested. Information on lead in drinking  
water, testing methods, and steps you can take to minimize  
exposure is available from the Safe Drinking Water Hotline, 
(800) 426-4791, or at: www.epa.gov/safewater/lead.
Your Water: Always Available, Always Assured 
The Diemer Water Treatment Plant, located in the hills  
above Yorba Linda, processes up to 520 million gallons of  
clean water per day — enough to fill the Rose Bowl every  
4 hours. 
The water is a blend  
from both the Colorado 
River Aque duct and the 
State Water Project. 
At 212-acres, it’s one 
of the largest water  
treatment plants in the  
U.S. It provides nearly half of Orange County’s total water  
supply. 
Water flowing from Diemer meets — or exceeds — all state 
and federal regulations. And it is kept safe from the treatment 
plant to your tap by constant testing throughout the  
distribution network. This constant surveillance ensures your 
drinking water stays within the requirements mandated by the 
federal Safe Drinking Water Act.
2023 Santa Margarita Water District Distribution System Water Quality 
 Disinfection Byproducts MCL (MRDL/MRDLG)      Average Amount      Range of Detections     MCL Violation?     Typical Source of Contaminant 
Total Trihalomethanes (ppb) 80 48 34 – 59 No Byproducts of Chlorine Disinfection 
Haloacetic Acids (ppb) 60 17 7.9 – 25 No Byproducts of Chlorine Disinfection 
Chlorine Residual (ppm) (4 / 4) 1.46 0.92 – 1.77 No Disinfectant Added for Treatment 
Aesthetic Quality 
Color (color units) 15* 1 ND – 1 No Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Odor (threshold odor number) 3* 1 1 No Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Specific Conductance (µmho/cm) 1,600* 848 374 – 1,088 No Substances that Form Ions in Water 
Turbidity (NTU) 5* <0.10 ND – 0.35 No Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Total Dissolved Solids (ppm) 1,000* 571 380 – 698 No Erosion of Natural Deposits 
Unregulated Chemicals – Tested in 2023 
Alkalinity, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated 110 70 – 128 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Hardness, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated 209 100 – 296 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Hardness, total (grains/gallon) Not Regulated 12 6 – 17 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits 
Sodium (ppm) Not Regulated 84 57 – 100 n/a Salt Present in Water; Naturally Occuring 
Eight locations in the distribution system are tested quarterly for total trihalomethanes and haloacetic acids; forty-three locations are tested monthly for color, odor, and turbidity. 
MRDL = Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level; MRDLG = Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level Goal      *Contaminant is regulated by a secondary standard to maintain aesthetic qualities (taste , odor, color).
Highest Number Number of Months 
 Microbiological MCL MCLG of Detections in Violation Typical Source of Contaminant 
E. coli (a) 0 0 0 Human and animal fecal waste 
(a) Routine and repeat samples are total coliform-positive and either is E. coli-positive or system fails to take repeat samples 
following E. coli-positive routine sample or system fails to analyze total coliform-positive repeat sample for E. coli.
Lead and Copper Action Levels at Residential Taps 
Action Level Public 90th Percentile          Sites Exceeding AL / AL Typical Source  
(AL) Health Goal Value Number of Sites Violation? of Contaminant 
Lead (ppb) 15 0.2 ND 0 / 51 No Corrosion of Household Plumbing 
Copper (ppm) 1.3 0.3 0.064 0 / 51 No Corrosion of Household Plumbing 
Every three years, at least 50 residences are tested for lead and copper at-the-tap. Santa Margarita Water District tested 51 homes in the most recent set of samples collected in 2021. 
Lead was not detected in any sample. Copper was detected in 9 samples; none exceeded the Action Level (AL).  
A regulatory action level is the concentration of a contaminant which, if exceeded, triggers treatment or other requirements that a w ater system must follow. 
Unregulated Chemicals Requiring Monitoring in the Distribution System 
 Chemical Notification Level PHG Average Amount Range of Detections Most Recent Sampling Date 
Haloacetic acids (HAA5) (ppb) n/a n/a 7.23 2.73 – 12.8 2020 
Haloacetic acids (HAA6Br) (ppb) n/a n/a 5.57 3.82 – 7.38 2020 
Haloacetic acids (HAA9) (ppb) n/a n/a 11.7 6.17 – 18.2 2020 
~ 7 ~
Colorado
River
The
Bay-Delta
Gene
Pumping
Station
Chrisman
Pumping
Plant
Edmonston
Pumping
Plant
REDDING
SACRAMENTO
SAN
FRANCISCO
LOS
ANGELES
ORANGE
COUNTY
BAKERSFIELD
SAN
DIEGO
P A C I F I C
 O C E A N  
California Aqueduct
STATE WATER PROJECT
Colorado
Aqueduct
Millerton
Lake
Folsom
Lake
Shasta
LakeTrinity
Lake
Lake
Isabella
Lake
Oroville
Sacramento
River
Feather
River
San
Joaquin
River
New
Hogan
Reservoir
Castaic 
Lake
Pyramid
Lake
Silverwood
Lake
Lake
Perris
Lake
Mathews
Managed by the Metro poli-  
tan Water District of Southern 
California, the Colora do River 
Aqueduct begins near Parker  
Dam on the Colorado River. There, 
the Gene Pumping Station lifts the  
water over 300 feet, and it begins its  
242 mile journey to Lake Mathews, just  
outside the City of Corona. Along the way, 
the water passes through two  
reservoirs, five pumping stations,  
62 miles of canals, and 176 miles  
of tunnels, buried conduit and  
siphons. All told, the water is lifted 
four times, a  total of more than  
1,300 feet. 
After its journey across the  
Mojave Desert, the water descends into the  Coachella Valley 
and through the San Gorgonio Pass. Near Cabazon, the aqueduct 
flows underground, passing beneath the San Jacinto Mountains and 
continuing until it reaches its terminus at Lake Mathews. From there, 
156 miles of distribution lines, along with eight more tunnels, delivers  
the water throughout Southern California.
Have you ever wondered where your water comes from? Here in the Santa Margarita 
Water District, our water is surface water imported by the MWDSC and IRWD.  
MWDSC’s imported water sources are the Colorado River and the State Water  
Project, which draws water from the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta. 
Water from Northern California travels to us through a complex delivery system  
known as the California State Water Project. Designed and built in the 1960s, the  
State Water Project is one of the largest public water and power utilities in the world, 
providing drinking water for more than 25 million people statewide.  
Managed by the California Department of Water Resources, the project stretches  
over 700 miles, from Lake Oroville in the north to Lake Perris in the south. Water  
stored in Lake Oroville, Folsom Lake, and other tributaries, and fed by snow melt  
from the Sierra Mountains, flows into the Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers, and  
from there into reservoirs in the Bay-Delta region.  
From the Bay-Delta, giant pumps lift the water into the 444-mile-long California  
Aqueduct, there to flow southward to cities and farms in central and Southern 
California. Composed mainly of concrete-lined canals, the Aqueduct also  
includes over 20 miles of tunnels, more than 130 miles of pipelines, and 
27 miles of siphons. Along the way, the water is pumped 2,882 feet 
over the T ehachapi Mountains. The Edmonston Pumping Plant 
alone lifts millions of gallons a day up 1,926 feet, the highest 
single water lift in the world. 
Is it any wonder the State Water Project is the  
largest single consumer of power in the  
State of California?
THE CHRISMAN PUMPING PLANT 
ON THE CALIFORNIA AQUEDUCT
THE GENE  PUMPING STATION 
ON THE COLORADO AQUEDUCT
ENGLEBRIGHT DAM 
ON THE YUBA RIVER
T otal Dissolved Solids (TDS) is an indicator of the  
aesthetic characteristics of drinking water, and a gauge 
of a broad array of chemical constituents within the  
water. It is a measure of all the combined inorganic and 
organic substances, and while it is not associated with 
any health effects, TDS can impact the appearance  
and taste of water. 
TDS is mainly inorganic salts, as well as a small  
amount of organic  matter. Common inorganic salts  
found in water include calcium, magnesium,  
potassium and sodium, along with nitrates, chlorides  
and sulfates. These minerals originate from a variety  
of sources, both natural and through human activity. 
Alone, dissolved solids are usually not a health  
hazard. Some people, in fact, buy mineral water, which 
has naturally elevated levels of  
dissolved solids. The USEPA includes  
TDS as a second ary standard, meaning 
it is a voluntary guideline for aesthetic  
and cosmetic effects. Kept within the  
established guidelines, TDS can impart 
a favorable taste to water. Too low,  
however, can give water a flat taste. 
There are issues, how ever, with high 
levels of TDS. Increased TDS concen tra -
tions can produce hard water,  which  
stains household fix tures, corrodes  
pipes, and imparts a metallic taste. 
Within the SMWD system, however, you can be assured that TDS are kept  
well within the established secondary standards.
Total Dissolved Solids, Alkalinity, and Hardness
F
or information about this report, or  
your water quality in general, please 
contact Customer Service at (949)  
459-6420 or custservice@smwd.com. 
The Santa Margarita Water District  
has two Regular Board meetings  each 
month. Meeting details can be found  on the District’s website at  
https:/ /smwd.com/meetings. 
Please feel free to partici pate in these meetings. 
For more information about the health effects of the listed  
contaminants in the following tables, call the USEPA hotline at  
(800) 426-4791. The USEPA also maintains a water-related website 
at www.epa.gov/safewater.
We Invite You 
to Learn More 
About Your 
Water’s Quality
Southern California has an arid climate and wise water use needs to  
become a part of everyone’s daily lives. For as finite as our water  
resources are, they get smaller every year. Simple water saving acts like 
the ones listed here can save countless gallons of water every day. 
S Soak pots and pans instead of letting water run while you scrub them  
clean. This both saves water and makes the job easier. 
S Keep a pitcher of drinking water in the refrigerator. This can save gallons 
of water every day and it’s always cold! 
S Plug the sink instead of running water to rinse your razor. This can save 
upwards of 300 gallons of water a month. 
S Use a broom instead of a hose to clean off sidewalks and driveways. 
It takes very little time to sweep and the water savings quickly adds up. 
S Check your sprinkler system for leaks, overspray, and broken sprinkler 
heads and repair promptly. This can save countless gallons each time 
you water. 
S Water plants in the early morning. It reduces evaporation and ensures 
deeper watering. 
S Check your toilets for leaks and make sure to close showers and  
faucets properly. This can save countless gallons of water.
Where Do We Use Water the Most? 
Outdoor watering of lawns and gardens makes up approxi mately 60% of  
home water use. By reducing your outdoor water use — by either cutting back 
on irrigation or planting more drought tolerant landscaping — you can  
dramatically reduce your overall water use. 
Save the most where you use the most: Make your outdoor use efficient.
How Can You Learn More? 
There’s a wealth of information on the internet about Drinking  
Water Quality and water issues in general. Some  good sites to 
begin your own research are: 
Metropolitan Water District of So. California: 
www.mwdh2o.com 
California Department of Water Resources: 
www.water.ca.gov 
The Water Education Foundation: www.watereducation.org 
T o learn more about Water Conservation & Rebate Information: 
http:/ /smwd.com/ conservation 
And to see the Aqueducts in action, checkout these two videos: 
Wings Over the State Water Project: youtu.be/8A1v1Rr2neU 
Wings Over the Colorado Aqueduct: youtu.be/KipMQh5t0f4
26111 Antonio Parkway 
Rancho Santa Margarita, California 92688 
(949) 459-6400  S  www.smwd.com
Water Conservation is Always a PriorityWater Conservation is Always a Priority
T otal 
Dissolved Solids 
Average Amount: 571 mg/L 
Range: 380 – 698 mg/L 
Alkalinity 
Average Amount: 110 mg/L 
Range: 70 – 128 mg/L 
Hardness 
Average Amount: 209 mg/L 
Range: 100 – 296 mg/L