Through comprehensive water quality 
compliance testing programs, your drinking 
water is monitored from source to tap, to ensure 
that it meets or surpasses all federal and state 
drinking water regulations.
2026
Serving San Juan 
Capistrano
Reporting Y ear 2025
Source Water Assessment
Imported (MWDSC and IRWD) Water Assessment
Every five years, MWDSC is required by DDW to examine 
possible sources of drinking water contamination in its State 
Water Project and Colorado River source waters. The most 
recent surveys for MWDSC’s source waters are the Colorado 
River Watershed Sanitary Survey—2022 Update and the 
State Water Project Watershed Sanitary Survey—2021 
Update. The IRWD’s watershed sanitary survey for Santiago 
Reservoir (Irvine Lake) was updated in 2025. Water from 
the Colorado River is considered to be most vulnerable to 
contamination from recreation, urban/stormwater runoff, 
increasing urbanization in the watershed, and wastewater. 
Water supplies from Northern California’s State Water 
Project are most vulnerable to contamination from urban/
stormwater runoff, wildlife, agriculture, recreation, and 
wastewater.
U.S. EPA also requires MWDSC and IRWD to complete 
a source water assessment (SWA) that uses information 
collected in the watershed sanitary surveys. MWDSC 
completed its SWA in December 2002. The most recent 
SWA for IRWD’s Santiago Reservoir was updated in 2001. 
The SWA is used to evaluate the vulnerability of water 
sources to contamination and helps determine whether 
more protective measures are needed. Copies of the most 
recent summary of the Watershed Sanitary Surveys or the 
SWA can be obtained by calling SMWD Customer Care at  
(949) 459-6420.
Groundwater Assessment
A copy of the assessment of the drinking water sources 
completed in March 2001 is available at State Water Resources 
Control Board, Division of Drinking Water, 2 MacArthur 
Place, Suite 150, Santa Ana, CA 92707 or by contacting 
SMWD Customer Care at (949) 459-6420.
Sources of Supply
Y
our drinking water comes
from three sources. Local 
groundwater is pumped to the San 
Juan Groundwater Plant, where 
it is treated by S MWD  staff. 
Additional water is purchased from 
IRWD and MWDSC. IRWD’s 
Baker Water Treatment Plant uses surface water from both 
MWDSC and Santiago Reservoir (Irvine Lake). MWDSC’s 
imported water sources are the Colorado River and the State 
Water Project, which draws water from the Sacramento–San 
Joaquin River Delta.
Your 2026 Water Quality Report
S
ince 1990, California public water utilities have been providing an annual Water Quality Report to their customers. This year’s
report covers drinking water quality testing and reporting for 2025.  Santa Margarita Water District (SMWD) vigilantly safe-
guards its water supply, and as in years past, the water delivered to your home meets or surpasses the quality standards required by 
federal and state regulatory agencies. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) and the State Water Resources Control 
Board (SWRCB), Division of Drinking Water (DDW) are the agencies responsible for establishing and enforcing drinking water 
quality standards.
The drinking water supply includes treated local groundwater and treated surface water imported from Irvine Ranch Water District 
(IRWD) and Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWDSC). IRWD and MWDSC test for regulated and unregulated 
chemicals in the delivered drinking water. SMWD conducts similar testing on the local groundwater and its distribution system 
as well. Unregulated chemical monitoring helps U.S. EPA and DDW determine where certain chemicals occur and whether new 
standards need to be established for those chemicals to protect public health. The state allows us to monitor some contaminants less 
than once per year because the concentrations of these contaminants do not change frequently. Our data, though more than a year 
old, is representative.
Important Health Information
S
ome people may be more vulnerable to contami -
nants in drinking water than the general population. 
Immunocompromised persons such as persons with cancer 
undergoing chemotherapy, persons who have undergone 
organ transplants, people with HIV/AIDS or other immune 
system disorders, some elderly, and infants can be particu -
larly at risk from infections. These people should seek advice 
about drinking water from their health-care providers. U.S. 
EPA/CDC guidelines on appropriate means to lessen the 
risk of infection by Cryptosporidium and other microbial 
contaminants are available from the Safe Drinking Water 
Hotline, (800) 426-4791.
Este informe contiene información importante sobre su agua potable. T raducirlo, o 
hablar con alguien que lo entienda.
This report contains important information about your drinking water. T ranslate it, 
or speak with someone who understands it.
2
Learn More About Your Water’s Quality
F
or information about this report, or your water quality in
general, please contact Customer Care at (949) 459-6420 
or CustomerCare@smwd.com. SMWD has several board 
meetings each month. Meeting details can be found on the 
district’s website at smwd.com/meetings. Please feel free to 
participate in these meetings.
About Lead in Tap Water
L
ead can cause serious
health problems, espe-
cially for pregnant women 
and young children. Lead 
in drinking water is pri -
marily from materials and 
components associated 
with service lines and home 
plumbing. Santa Margarita 
Water District is responsible for providing high quality drink-
ing water and removing lead pipes, but cannot control the 
variety of materials used in plumbing components in your 
home. You share the responsibility for protecting yourself and 
your family from the lead in your home plumbing. You can 
take responsibility by identifying and removing lead materials 
within your home plumbing and taking steps to reduce your 
family’s risk. Before drinking tap water, flush your pipes for 
several minutes by running your tap, taking a shower, doing 
laundry or a load of dishes. You can also use a filter certified by 
an American National Standards Institute accredited certifier 
to reduce lead in drinking water. If you are concerned about 
lead in your water and wish to have your water tested, contact 
Santa Margarita Water District at CustomerCare@smwd.com 
or call (949) 459-6420. Information on lead in drinking water, 
testing methods, and steps you can take to minimize exposure 
is available at http://www.epa.gov/safewater/lead.
Where Can You Learn More?
T
here’s a wealth of information on the internet about
drinking water quality and water issues in general. Some 
good sites to begin your research are:
• Metropolitan Water District of Southern California:
mwdh2o.com
• California Department of Water Resources: water.ca.gov
• The Water Education Foundation: watereducation.org
T o learn more about Water Conservation & Rebate Information:
• smw d.com/conservation
To see the aqueducts in action, check out these two videos:
• Wings Over Water: youtu.be/8A1v1Rr2neU
• Wings Over Metropolitan’s Colorado River Aqueduct:
youtu.be/KipMQh5t0f4
Lead Service Line Inventory
T
o address the presence of lead in drinking water and
reduce the potential for lead exposure, the U.S. EPA 
mandated that all public water systems create and maintain 
an inventory of service line materials by October 16, 2024. 
This lead service line inventory is an essential step in ensur-
ing the safety and quality of public water supplies. The 
SMWD has completed its initial lead service line inventory 
in 2024.  After reviewing historical records and completing 
field investigations, SMWD has determined there is no lead 
or galvanized requiring replacement of any service lines in its 
distribution system. This includes any privately-owned service 
lines.  A copy of the inventory is available for public review at  
smwd.com/553/Lead-FAQ.
T otal Dissolved Solids, Alkalinity, and 
Hardness
T
otal dissolved solids (TDS) are an indicator of the aes -
thetic characteristics of drinking water and a gauge of a 
broad array of chemical constituents within the water. It is a 
measure of all the combined inorganic and organic substances, 
and while it is not associated with any health effects, TDS can 
impact the appearance and taste of water.
TDS is mainly inorganic salts, as well as a small amount of 
organic matter. Common inorganic salts found in water include 
calcium, magnesium, potassium, and sodium, along with 
nitrates, chlorides, and sulfates. These minerals originate from 
a variety of sources, both natural and caused by human activity.
Alone, dissolved solids are usually not a health hazard. Some 
people buy mineral water, which has naturally elevated 
levels of dissolved solids. The U.S. EPA includes TDS as a 
secondary standard, a voluntary guideline for aesthetic and 
cosmetic effects. Kept within the established guidelines, TDS 
can impart a favorable taste to water. T oo little can give water 
a flat taste. There are issues, however, with high levels of 
TDS. Increased TDS concentrations can produce hard water, 
which stains household fixtures, corrodes pipes, and imparts 
a metallic taste. Within the SMWD system, you can be 
assured that TDS is kept well within the State of California’s 
established secondary standard.
3
2025 SANTA MARGARITA WATER DISTRICT - ID9 DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM WATER QUALITY
MCL (MRDL/
MRDLG)
AVERAGE 
AMOUNT
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS
MCL
VIOLATION TYPICAL SOURCE OF CONTAMINANT
Disinfection Byproducts
Chlorine Residual (ppm) (4 / 4) 1.77 1.58 - 1.99 No Disinfectant Added for Treatment
Haloacetic Acids (ppb) 60 7 ND - 8.9 No Byproducts of Chlorine Disinfection
Total Trihalomethanes (ppb) 80 32 8.1 - 46 No Byproducts of Chlorine Disinfection
Aesthetic Quality
Color (color units) 15* 1 1 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Odor (threshold odor number) 3* 1 1 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Specific Conductance (µmho/cm) 1,600* 835 194 - 1,085 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Total Dissolved Solids (ppm) 1,000* 503 260 - 680 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Turbidity (NTU) 5* 0.07 0.05 - 0.25 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
 Unregulated Chemicals - Tested in 2025
Alkalinity, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated 100 20 - 130 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated 210 89 - 290 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total (grains/gallon) Not Regulated 12 5.2 - 17 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Sodium (ppm) Not Regulated 84 62 - 110 N/A Salt Present in Water; Naturally Occuring
Eight locations in the distribution system are tested quarterly for total trihalomethanes and haloacetic acids; twelve** locations are tested monthly for color, odor and 
turbidity, and weekly for coliforms bacteria. MRDL = Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level; MRDLG = Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level Goal; *Chemical is regulated 
by a secondary standard to maintain aesthetic qualities (taste, odor, color).  ** 49 sites rotated weekly.
2025 Santa Margarita Water District - ID9 Drinking Water Quality
LEAD AND COPPER ACTION LEVELS AT RESIDENTIAL TAPS
ACTION 
LEVEL (AL)
PUBLIC 
HEALTH GOAL
90TH PERCENTILE
VALUE
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS
SITES EXCEEDING AL 
/ NUMBER OF SITES
AL
VIOLATION?
TYPICAL SOURCE OF 
CONTAMINANT
Lead (ppb) 15 0.2 ND ND 0 / 31 No Corrosion of Household Plumbing
Copper (ppm) 1.3 0.3 0.088 ND - 0.12 0 / 31 No Corrosion of Household Plumbing
Every three years, selected residences are tested for lead and copper at-the-tap.  The most recent set of thirty-one samples was collected in 2024. Lead was 
not detected in any home. Copper was detected in 14 homes, none of which exceeded the copper regulatory Action Level (AL). A regulatory Action Level is the 
concentration of a contaminant  which, if exceeded, triggers treatment or other requirements that a water system must follow.
MICROBIOLOGICAL MCL MCLG
HIGHEST NUMBER OF 
DETECTIONS
NO. OF MONTHS 
IN VIOLATION TYPICAL SOURCE OF BACTERIA
E. coli (a) 0 0 0 Human and animal fecal waste
(a) Routine and repeat samples are total coliform-positive and either is E. coli-positive or system fails to take repeat samples following E. coli-positive routine sample or 
system fails to analyze total coliform-positive repeat sample for E. coli.
4
ppb = parts-per-billion; ppm = parts-per-million; pCi/L = picoCuries per liter; NTU = nephelometric turbidity units; ND = not detected; N/A = not applicable; MCL = 
Maximum Contaminant Level; (MCLG) = Federal MCL Goal; PHG = California Public Health Goal;  µmho/cm = micromho per centimeter; 
*Chemical is regulated by a secondary standard to maintain aesthetic qualities (taste, odor, color).
2025 SAN JUAN GROUNDWATER PLANT TREATED GROUNDWATER QUALITY
 CHEMICAL MCL
PHG 
(MCLG) 
AVERAGE 
AMOUNT
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS
MCL
VIOLATION?
MOST RECENT 
SAMPLING DATE TYPICAL SOURCE OF CHEMICAL
 Radiologicals 
Alpha Radiation (pCi/L) 15 (0) ND ND No 2023 Erosion of Natural Deposits
Uranium (pCi/L) 20 0.43 ND ND No 2023 Erosion of Natural Deposits
 Organic Chemicals 
Methyl-Tert-Butyl Ether 
(ppb)
13 13 ND ND No 2025 Leaking Underground Storage 
Tanks; Industrial Discharge
 Inorganic Chemicals 
Arsenic (ppb) 10 0.004 ND ND No 2025 Erosion of Natural Deposits
Fluoride (ppm) 2 1 ND ND No 2022 Erosion of Natural Deposits
 Secondary Standards*
Chloride (ppm) 500* N/A 9.8 8.2 - 11 No 2025 Erosion of Natural Deposits
Iron (ppb) 300* N/A ND ND No 2025 Erosion of Natural Deposits
Manganese (ppb) 50* N/A ND ND No 2025 Erosion of Natural Deposits
Specific Conductance 
(µmho/cm)
1,600* N/A 192 180 - 200 No 2025 Substances Form Ions in Water
Sulfate (ppm) 500* N/A 5.18 2.4 - 9.1 No 2025 Erosion of Natural Deposits
Total Dissolved Solids 
(ppm)
1,000* N/A 93 62 - 110 No 2025 Erosion of Natural Deposits
Turbidity (NTU) 5* N/A 0.16 ND - 0.3 No 2025 Erosion of Natural Deposits
 Unregulated Chemicals
Alkalinity, total (ppm as
CaCO3)
Not Regulated N/A 71 62 - 83 N/A 2025 Erosion of Natural Deposits
Calcium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 0.4 0.2 - 0.5 N/A 2025 Erosion of Natural Deposits
Hardness, total (ppm as
CaCO3)
Not Regulated N/A 2.9 ND - 9 N/A 2025 Erosion of Natural Deposits
Hardness, total (grains per
gallon)
Not Regulated N/A 0.17 ND - 0.53 N/A 2025 Erosion of Natural Deposits
Magnesium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 0.29 ND - 0.73 N/A 2025 Erosion of Natural Deposits
pH (pH units) Not Regulated N/A 7.95 7.2 - 8.8 N/A 2025 Hydrogen Ion Concentration
Potassium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A ND ND N/A 2025 Erosion of Natural Deposits
Sodium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 46 40 - 52 N/A 2025 Erosion of Natural Deposits
5
ppb = parts per billion; ppm = parts per million; pCi/L = picoCuries per liter; µmho/cm = micromhos per centimeter; NTU = nephelometric turbidity units; MCL = Maximum 
Contaminant Level;  PHG = California Public Health Goal; MCLG = federal MCL Goal;  MRDL = Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level; MRDLG = Maximum Residual 
Disinfectant Level Goal; NL = Notification Level;  N/A = not applicable; TT = treatment technique. 
* Chemical is regulated by a secondary standard.
** On January 21, 2025, a higher than normal (7 NTU) grab sample result was reported. This value is inconsistent with the continuous online analyzer which showed 
a reading of 0.0259 NTU at the same time that the grab sample was taken. The available evidence suggests that the higher than normal grab sample was not a valid 
representation of the water quality produced by the plant at the time. No other result above 0.1 NTU was reported throughout the year.
2025 IRVINE RANCH WATER DISTRICT BAKER WATER TREATMENT PLANT
 CHEMICAL MCL PHG
AVERAGE 
AMOUNT
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS
MCL
VIOLATION? TYPICAL SOURCE OF CHEMICAL
 Radiologicals - Tested in 2025
Uranium (pCi/L) 20 0.43 1.9 1.9 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
 Inorganic Chemicals - Tested in 2025
Arsenic (ppb) 10 0.004 ND ND - 2.2 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Barium (ppm) 1 2 0.129 0.119 - 0.141 No Refinery Discharge, Erosion of Natural 
Deposits
Fluoride (ppm) 2.0 1 0.33 0.27 - 0.37 No Erosion of Natural Deposits; Water Additive 
for Dental Health
 Secondary Standards* - Tested in 2025
Chloride (ppm) 500* N/A 109 108 - 110 No  Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Odor (threshold odor number) 3* N/A 1 ND - 3 No  Naturally-occurring Organic Materials
Specific Conductance (µmho/cm) 1,600* N/A 1,049 1,030 - 1,068 No  Substances that Form Ions in Water
Sulfate (ppm) 500* N/A 219 217 - 221 No  Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Total Dissolved Solids (ppm) 1,000* N/A 625 560 - 682 No  Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Turbidity (NTU) 5* N/A 0.25 ND - 7** No  Soil Runoff
 Unregulated Chemicals - Tested in 2025
Alkalinity, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 119 106 - 129 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Boron (ppm) NL = 1 N/A 0.143 0.13 - 0.186 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Calcium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 73 65 - 81.3 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total as CaCO3  (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 293 269 - 322 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total (grains/gallon) Not Regulated N/A 17 16 - 19 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Magnesium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 26.9 26 - 28.8 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
pH (pH units) Not Regulated N/A 7.6 7 - 8 N/A Hydrogen Ion Concentration
Potassium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 5.4 4.9 - 6 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Sodium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 101 96.9 - 106 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Total Organic Carbon (ppm) TT N/A 2.9 2.9 N/A Various Natural and Man-made Sources
IRVINE RANCH WATER DISTRICT BAKER WATER 
TREATMENT PLANT
TREATMENT 
TECHNIQUE
TURBIDITY 
MEASUREMENTS
TT 
VIOLATION?
TYPICAL SOURCE IN DRINKING 
WATER
Turbidity - Combined Filter Effluent
1) Highest single turbidity measurement (NTU) 0.1 0.030 No Soil Runoff
2) Percentage of samples less than or equal to 0.3 NTU 95% 100% No Soil Runoff
Turbidity is a measure of the cloudiness of the water, an indication of particulate matter, some of which might include harmful microorganisms. Low turbidity in the 
treated water is a good indicator of effective filtration.  Filtration is called a “treatment technique” (TT).  A treatment technique is a required process intended to reduce 
the level of chemicals in drinking water that are difficult and sometimes impossible  to measure directly. NTU = Nephelometric Turbidity Units
UNREGULATED CHEMICALS REQUIRING MONITORING
CHEMICAL
NOTIFICATION 
LEVEL PHG
AVERAGE 
AMOUNT
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS MOST RECENT SAMPLING DATE
Lithium (ppb) N/A N/A 46 46 2025
6
2025 METROPOLITAN WATER DISTRICT OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA TREATED SURFACE WATER
CONSTITUENT MCL
PHG 
(MCLG) 
AVERAGE 
AMOUNT
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS
MCL 
VIOLATION? TYPICAL SOURCE IN DRINKING WATER
 Radiologicals - Tested in 2023 and 2025
Gross Alpha Particle Activity (pCi/L) 15 (0) ND ND - 5 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Gross Beta Particle Activity (pCi/L) 50 (0) ND ND - 6 No Decay of Natural and Man-made Deposits
Uranium (pCi/L) 20 0.43 1 ND - 3 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
 Inorganic Chemicals - Tested in 2025
Aluminum (ppm) 1 0.6 0.058 ND - 0.082 No Treatment Process Residue, Natural 
Deposits
Barium (ppm) 1 2 0.13 0.13 No Refinery Discharge, Erosion of Natural 
Deposits
Bromate (ppb) 10 0.1 2.4 ND - 8.4 No Byproduct of Drinking Water Ozonation
Fluoride (ppm) 2 1 0.7 0.6 - 0.8 No Water Additive for Dental Health
 Secondary Standards* - Tested in 2025
Aluminum (ppb) 200* 600 58 ND - 82 No Treatment Process Residue, Natural 
Deposits
Chloride (ppm) 500* N/A 92 84 - 99 No Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Color (color units) 15* N/A 1 1 No Naturally-occurring Organic Materials
Specific Conductance (µmho/cm) 1,600* N/A 873 759 - 987 No Substances that Form Ions in Water
Sulfate (ppm) 500* N/A 182 146 - 218 No Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Total Dissolved Solids (ppm) 1,000* N/A 545 465 - 625 No Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
 Unregulated Chemicals - Tested in 2025
Alkalinity, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 108 93 - 122 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Boron (ppm) NL=1 N/A 0.13 0.13 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Calcium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 56 44 - 68 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 236 191 - 280 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total (grains/gal) Not Regulated N/A 14 11 - 16 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Magnesium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 22 19 - 25 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
pH (pH units) Not Regulated N/A 8.3 8.2 - 8.3 N/A Hydrogen Ion Concentration
Potassium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 4.3 3.8 - 4.8 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Sodium (ppm) Not Regulated N/A 88 78 - 97 N/A Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Total Organic Carbon (ppm) TT N/A 2.4 1.6 - 2.6 N/A Various Natural and Man-made Sources
ppb = parts per billion; ppm = parts per million; pCi/L = picoCuries per liter; µmho/cm = micromhos per centimeter; ND = not detected; MCL = Maximum Contaminant 
Level; (MCLG) = Federal  MCL Goal; PHG = California Public Health Goal; NL = Notification Level;  N/A = not applicable; TT = treatment technique. *Chemical is regulated 
by a secondary standard.
UNREGULATED CHEMICALS REQUIRING MONITORING
CHEMICAL
NOTIFICATION 
LEVEL PHG
AVERAGE 
AMOUNT
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS MOST RECENT SAMPLING DATE
Lithium (ppb) N/A N/A 46 46 - 47 2025
METROPOLITAN WATER DISTRICT 
DIEMER FILTRATION PLANT
TREATMENT 
TECHNIQUE
TURBIDITY 
MEASUREMENTS
TT 
VIOLATION?
TYPICAL SOURCE IN DRINKING 
WATER
Turbidity - Combined Filter Effluent
1) Highest single turbidity measurement (NTU) 0.3 0.05 No Soil Runoff
2) Percentage of samples less than or equal to 0.3 NTU 95% 100% No Soil Runoff
Turbidity is a measure of the cloudiness of the water, an indication of particulate matter, some of which might include harmful microorganisms. Low turbidity in 
Metropolitan’s treated water is a good indicator of effective filtration.  Filtration is called a “treatment technique” (TT).  A treatment technique is a required process 
intended to reduce the level of chemicals in drinking water that are difficult and sometimes impossible  to measure directly. NTU = Nephelometric Turbidity Units
7
Drinking Water Contaminants
T
he sources of drinking water (both tap water and bottled water) include rivers, lakes, streams,
ponds, reservoirs, springs, and wells. As water travels over the surface of the land or through 
the ground, it dissolves naturally occurring minerals and, in some cases, radioactive material and can 
pick up substances resulting from the presence of animals or from human activity.
Contaminants that may be present in source water include:
• Microbial contaminants, such as viruses and bacteria, that may come from sewage treatment
plants, septic systems, agricultural livestock operations, and wildlife.
• Inorganic contaminants, such as salts and metals, that can be naturally occurring or result from
urban stormwater runoff, industrial or domestic wastewater discharges, oil and gas production,
mining, or farming.
• Pesticides and herbicides that may come from a variety of sources such as agriculture, urban
stormwater runoff, and residential uses.
• Organic chemical contaminants, including synthetic and volatile organic chemicals, that are by-products of industrial processes
and petroleum production and can also come from gas stations, urban stormwater runoff, agricultural application, and septic
systems.
• Radioactive contaminants that can be naturally occurring or the result of oil and gas production and mining activities.
T o ensure that tap water is safe to drink, the U.S. EPA and SWRCB prescribe regulations that limit the amount of certain contaminants 
in water provided by public water systems. U.S. Food and Drug Administration regulations and California law also establish limits for 
contaminants in bottled water that provide the same protection for public health. 
Drinking water, including bottled water, may reasonably be expected to contain at least small amounts of some contaminants. The 
presence of contaminants does not necessarily indicate that water poses a health risk. More information about contaminants and 
potential health effects can be obtained by calling the U.S. EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Hotline (1-800-426-4791).
Drinking Water Definitions
What are water quality standards? 
Drinking water standards established by U.S. EPA and DDW set 
limits for substances that may affect consumer health or aesthetic 
qualities of drinking water.
The tables in this report show the following types of water quality 
standards:
• Maximum contaminant level (MCL): The highest level of a
contaminant that is allowed in drinking water. Primary MCLs
are set as close to the PHGs (or MCLGs) as is economically
and technologically feasible.
• Maximum residual disinfectant level (MRDL): The highest
level of a disinfectant allowed in drinking water. There
is convincing evidence that addition of a disinfectant is
necessary for control of microbial contaminants.
• Secondary MCLs are set to protect the odor, taste, and
appearance of drinking water.
• Primary drinking water standard (PDWS): MCLs for
contaminants that affect health, along with their monitoring
and reporting requirements and water treatment requirements.
• Regulatory action level (AL): The concentration of a
contaminant that, if exceeded, triggers treatment or other
requirements that a water system must follow.
What is a water quality goal? 
In addition to mandatory water quality standards, U.S. EPA 
and DDW have set voluntary water quality goals for some 
contaminants. Water quality goals are often set at such low 
levels that they are not achievable in practice and are not directly 
measurable. Nevertheless, these goals provide useful guideposts 
and direction for water management practices.
The tables in this report include three types of water quality goals:
• Maximum contaminant level goal (MCLG): The level of
a contaminant in drinking water below which there is no
known or expected risk to health. MCLGs are set by U.S.
EPA.
• Maximum residual disinfectant level goal (MRDLG): The
level of a drinking water disinfectant below which there is no
known or expected risk to health. MRDLGs do not reflect
the benefits of the use of disinfectants to control microbial
contaminants.
• Public health goal (PHG): The level of a contaminant in
drinking water below which there is no known or expected
risk to health. PHGs are set by the California EPA.
How are contaminants measured? 
Water is sampled and tested throughout the year. Contaminants 
are measured in:
• Parts per million (ppm) or milligrams per liter (mg/L)
• Parts per billion (ppb) or micrograms per liter (µg/L)
• Parts per trillion (ppt) or nanograms per liter (ng/L)
8
Have you ever wondered where your water comes from? Here 
in the City of San Juan Capistrano, our water is drawn from 
local groundwater supplies, then blended with water imported 
from Northern California and the Colorado River. Water from 
Northern California travels to us through a complex delivery 
system known as the California State Water Project. Designed 
and built in the 1960s, the State Water Project is one of the 
largest public water and power utilities in the world, providing 
drinking water for more than 25 million people statewide. 
Managed by the California Department of Water Resources, 
the project stretches over 700 miles from Lake Oroville in the 
north to Lake Perris in the south. Water stored in Lake Oroville, 
Folsom Lake, and other tributaries and fed by snowmelt from 
the Sierra Nevada Mountains flows into the Sacramento and 
San Joaquin Rivers, and from there into reservoirs in the Bay-
Delta region. From the Bay-Delta, giant pumps lift the water 
into the 444-mile-long California Aqueduct, from which it 
flows southward to cities and farms in Central and Southern 
California. Composed mainly of concrete-lined canals, the 
aqueduct includes over 20 miles of tunnels, over 130 miles of 
pipelines, and 27 miles of siphons. Along the way, the water 
is pumped 2,882 feet over the Tehachapi Mountains. 
The Edmonston Pumping Plant alone lifts millions 
of gallons a day up 1,926 feet, the highest single 
water lift in the world. Is it any wonder the 
State Water Project is the largest single 
consumer of power in California? 
M
anaged by the
MWDSC, the 
Colorado River Aqueduct 
begins near Parker Dam on 
the Colorado River. There, 
the Gene Pumping Station lifts 
the water over 300 feet as it 
begins its 242-mile journey to 
Lake Mathews, just outside 
the City of Corona. Along 
the way, the water passes 
through two reservoirs, five 
pumping stations, 62 miles 
of canals, and 176 miles of 
tunnels, buried conduits, 
and siphons. All told, the 
water is lifted four times, 
for a total of more than 
1,300 feet. 
After its journey across the Mojave Desert, the 
water descends into the Coachella Valley and through 
the San Gorgonio Pass. Near Cabazon, the aqueduct flows 
underground, passing beneath the San Jacinto Mountains and 
continuing until it reaches its terminus at Lake Mathews. From 
there, 156 miles of distribution lines, along with eight more 
tunnels and five drinking water treatment plants, deliver treated water 
throughout Southern California.
9
Where Does Our Water Comes From? And How Does it Get to Us?
Disinfectants and Disinfection By-Products in Drinking Water
D
isinfection of drinking water was one of the greatest public health advancements of the 20th century, significantly reducing the
spread of waterborne diseases caused by bacteria and viruses. T oday chlorine and chloramines are commonly used disinfectants 
to ensure safe drinking water.
How Disinfection Works
• Chlorine is added at the water source (groundwater wells or treatment plants) to kill harmful microorganisms.
• Residual chlorine remains in the distribution system to prevent bacterial growth in the pipes that carry water to homes and
businesses.
• Chloramines, a combination of chlorine and ammonia, are also used as a disinfectant and help reduce certain by-products.
Disinfection By-Products and Regulations
While effective, chlorine and chloramines can react with naturally occurring materials in water, forming disinfection by-products 
(DBPs), which may pose health risks. The most common DBPs are trihalomethanes (THMs) and haloacetic acids (HAAs). 
T o protect public health, the U.S. U.S. EPA regulates DBPs under the Safe Drinking Water Act:
• In 1979 the U.S. EPA set the maximum allowable total THM level at 100 parts per billion (ppb).
• In 2002 the Stage 1 Disinfectants/Disinfection Byproducts Rule lowered the limit to 80 ppb and added HAAs to the list of
regulated chemicals.
• In 2006 the Stage 2 Disinfectants/Disinfection Byproducts Rule introduced further monitoring and control measures.
• Full compliance began in 2012.
Your drinking water meets or surpasses all state and federal standards, with rigorous monitoring in place.
Important Considerations
• Fish and aquatic pets: Chloramines can be toxic to fish and should be removed from water used in aquariums.
• Kidney dialysis patients: Chloramines must be filtered from water used in dialysis treatment—consult your health-care provider.
For more information on water quality and regulations, visit:
• U.S. EPA water regulations: epa.gov/sdwa
• SWRCB: waterboards.ca.gov
PFAS Advisory
P
er- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a group of human-made chemicals that
have been used in various consumer products since the 1940s due to their resistance 
to heat, water, oils, and stains. These chemicals are prevalent in the environment and 
have been detected in water supplies nationwide. Studies suggest that exposure to certain 
PFAS may pose health risks. The U.S. EPA and DDW have established health-based 
advisories for PFAS. If PFAS levels exceed these guidelines, water agencies must notify 
their governing bodies and take necessary actions, such as removing affected sources from 
service or implementing treatment solutions.
T o address PFAS contamination, water providers have conducted testing and taken 
proactive steps to ensure safe drinking water.
Regulatory actions: The U.S. EPA announced final National Primary Drinking Water Regulations for six PFAS in April 2024. Public 
water systems are required to monitor these substances, with full compliance expected by 2029.
For more details on PFAS regulations and water safety, visit:
• California State Water Resources Control Board Division of Drinking Water: waterboards.ca.gov/pfas
• U.S. EPA: epa.gov/pfas
10
10
How T o Read Your Residential 
Water Meter
Y
our water meter is usually
located between the sidewalk 
and curb under a cement cover. 
Remove the cover by inserting 
a screwdriver in the hole in the 
lid, and then carefully lift the 
cover. The meter reads straight 
across, like the odometer in your 
car. Read only t he numbers in the 
white blocks (0895 in the image to 
the right). 
If you are trying to determine if you have a leak, turn off all 
the water in your home, both indoor and outdoor faucets, and 
then check the red or black triangular dial for any movement 
of the low-flow indicator. If there is movement, that indicates 
a leak between the meter and your plumbing system.
Understanding Your Water Meter
• Low-flow indicator: This will spin if any water is
flowing through the meter.
• Sweep hand:  Each full revolution of the sweep hand
indicates that one cubic foot of water (7.48 gallons) has
passed through the meter. The markings at the outer
edge of the dial indicate tenths and hundredths of a cubic
foot.
• Meter register:  The meter register is a lot like the
odometer in your car. The numbers keep a running total
of all the water that has passed through the meter. The
register shown here indicates that 89,505 cubic feet of
water has passed through this meter.
Water Conservation:  
Making Every Drop Count
Water is a limited natural resource, and using it efficiently is 
essential in both wet and dry years. Outdoor watering makes 
up about 60 percent of home water use, making it the biggest 
opportunity for savings.
Start Outdoors: Use Water Wisely in Your Yard
• Choose water-wise plants and drought-tolerant landscaping.
• Adjust sprinklers to avoid watering sidewalks and streets.
• Water in the early morning or late evening to reduce
evaporation.
• Fix leaks in irrigation systems—a small leak can waste
thousands of gallons per year.
• Use mulch to retain moisture and keep plants healthy.
• Visit smwd.com/179/Rebate-Programs for more
landscaping ideas and rebates.
Indoor Water-Saving Tips
• Take shorter showers—a five-minute shower uses much less
water than a bath.
• T urn off the tap while brushing your teeth, shaving, or
washing dishes.
• Fix leaks—a dripping faucet or running toilet can waste
thousands of gallons per year.
• Run dishwashers and washing machines only when full to
save up to 1,000 gallons per month.
• Keep a pitcher of drinking water in the refrigerator to avoid
running the tap for cold water.
Monitor and Manage Your Water Use
Many cities offer online water usage tracking to help residents 
monitor their water consumption in real time. By identifying 
leaks and adjusting usage habits, homeowners can save both water 
and money.
Why Conservation Matters
Southern California’s arid climate and reliance on imported water 
make conservation essential. Water is transported hundreds of 
miles through aqueducts from the Colorado River and Northern 
California, with high costs for pumping and treatment.
Small Actions, Big Impact
By making small changes in daily habits and using water more 
efficiently, we can protect this vital resource for future generations.
T o learn more about Water Conservation & Rebate Information:
• smwd.com/conservation
11
Santa Margarita Water District
26111 Antonio Parkway 
Rancho Santa Margarita, CA 92688
(949) 459 6420 • smwd.com
smwd.com/SJC
Cross Connection Control
I
n cooperation with the State Water Resources Control
Board Division of Drinking Water, SMWD’s major goal 
is to ensure the distribution of a reliable potable water sup -
ply to all domestic water users. In order for the District to 
achieve this goal, a Cross-Connection Control Management 
Plan (CCCMP) has been developed with an effective date of 
July 1, 2025. The District’s CCCMP was developed pursu -
ant to the requirements set forth in the Cross-Connection 
Control Policy Handbook (CCCPH) which replaced the State 
of California Administrative Code Title 17, Sections §7583 
through §7605 and applies to all State of California Public 
Water Systems, as defined in California’s Health and Safety 
Cost (CHSC, section 116275(h)).
