Reporting Y ear 2024
Presented By
2025
Through comprehensive 
water quality compliance 
testing programs, your 
drinking water is monitored 
from source to tap, to ensure 
that it meets or surpasses all 
federal and state Drinking 
Water regulations.

Este informe contiene información 
importante sobre su agua potable. T raducirlo, 
o hablar con alguien que lo entienda.
This report contains important information 
about your drinking water. T ranslate it, or 
speak with someone who understands it.
Your 2025 Water Quality Report
S
ince 1990, California public water utilities have been providing an annual Water Quality Report to their customers. This year’s 
report covers drinking water quality testing and reporting for 2024. Santa Margarita Water District (SMWD) vigilantly 
safeguards its water supply, and as in years past, the water delivered to your home meets or surpasses the quality standards required by 
federal and state regulatory agencies. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) and the State Water Resources Control 
Board (SWRCB), Division of Drinking Water (DDW) are the agencies responsible for establishing and enforcing drinking water 
quality standards.
The Irvine Ranch Water District (IRWD) and Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWDSC) supply treated, 
imported surface water to SMWD and test for unregulated chemicals in our water supply. Unregulated chemical monitoring helps 
U.S. EPA and DDW determine where certain chemicals occur and whether new standards need to be established for those chemicals 
to protect public health.
Through drinking water quality testing programs carried out by IRWD and MWDSC for treated surface water and the SMWD 
for the distribution system, your drinking water is constantly monitored from source to tap for regulated and unregulated 
constituents. In most cases, SMWD goes beyond what is required by more frequent testing on chemicals that may have 
known health risks but do not have drinking water standards. The state allows us to monitor for some contaminants 
less than once per year because the concentrations of these contaminants do not change frequently. Some of our 
data, though more than a year old, is representative. 
Important Health Information
S
ome people may be more vulnerable to contaminants in drink-
ing water than the general population. Immunocompromised 
persons such as persons with cancer undergoing chemotherapy, 
persons who have undergone organ transplants, people with 
HIV/AIDS or other immune system disorders, some elderly, and 
infants can be particularly at risk from infections. These people 
should seek advice about drinking water from their health-care 
providers. U.S. EPA/Centers for Disease Control (CDC) guide-
lines on appropriate means to lessen the risk of infection by 
Cryptosporidium and other microbial contaminants are avail -
able from the Safe Drinking Water Hotline (1-800-426-4791).
Cross Connections
I
n cooperation with the State Water Resources Control Board 
Division of Drinking Water, SMWD’s major goal is to ensure 
the distribution of a reliable potable water supply to all domestic 
water users. In order for the District to achieve this goal, a Cross-
Connection Control Management Plan (CCCMP) has been devel-
oped with an effective date of July 1, 2025. The District’s CCCMP 
was developed pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Cross-
Connection Control Policy Handbook (CCCPH) which replaced 
the State of California Administrative Code Title 17, Sections §7583 
through §7605 and applies to all State of California Public Water 
Systems, as defined in California’s Health and Safety Cost (CHSC, 
section 116275(h)).
Sources of Supply
Y
our drinking water consists of imported treated surface 
water from MWDSC and treated surface water from 
IRWD’s Baker Water T reatment Plant, which uses surface 
water from both MWDSC and Santiago Reservoir (Irvine 
Lake). MWDSC’s imported water sources are the Colorado 
River and the State Water Project, which draws water from the 
Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta.
Learn More About Your Water’s Quality
F
or information about this report, or your water quality in 
general, please contact Customer Care at (949) 459-6420 
or CustomerCare@smwd.com. SMWD has several board 
meetings each month. Meeting details can be found on the 
district’s website at smwd.com/meetings. Please feel free to 
participate in these meetings.
2
Quality Water is Our Priority
T
urn the tap and the water flows, 
as if by magic. Or so it seems. 
The reality is considerably differ -
ent. Delivering high-quality drinking 
water to our customers is a scientific 
and engineering feat that requires 
considerable effort and talent to 
ensure the water is always there, 
always safe to drink. Because tap 
water is highly regulated by state and 
federal laws, water treatment and dis-
tribution operators must be licensed.
Our licensed water professionals have an understanding of 
a wide range of subjects, including mathematics, biology, 
chemistry, physics, and engineering. Some of the tasks they 
complete on a regular basis include:
• Operating and maintaining equipment to purify and 
clarify water;
• Monitoring and inspecting machinery, meters, gauges, 
and operating conditions;
• Conducting tests and inspections on water and 
evaluating the results;
• Documenting and reporting test results and system 
operations to regulatory agencies; and
• Serving our community through customer support, 
education, and outreach.
So the next time you turn on your faucet, think of the skilled 
professionals who stand behind every drop.
About Lead in Tap Water
L
ead can cause serious health effects in people of all ages, 
especially pregnant people, infants (both formula-fed 
and breastfed), and young children.  Lead in drinking water 
is primarily from materials and parts used in service lines 
and in home plumbing. Santa Margarita Water District is 
responsible for providing high quality drinking water and 
removing lead pipes but cannot control the variety of materi -
als used in the plumbing in your home. Because lead levels 
may vary over time, lead exposure is possible even when 
your tap sampling results do not detect lead at one point 
in time. You can help protect yourself and your family by 
identifying and removing lead materials within your home 
plumbing and taking steps to reduce your family’s risk. 
Using a filter, certified by an American National Standards 
Institute accredited certifier to reduce lead, is effective in 
reducing lead exposures. Follow the instructions provided 
with the filter to ensure the filter is used properly. Use only 
cold water for drinking, cooking, and making baby formula. 
Boiling water does not remove lead from water. Before using 
tap water for drinking, cooking, or making baby formula, 
flush your pipes for several minutes. You can do this by run -
ning your tap, taking a shower, doing laundry or a load of 
dishes. If you have a lead service line or galvanized requiring 
replacement service line, you may need to flush your pipes 
for a longer period. If you are concerned about lead in your 
water and wish to have your water tested, contact Santa 
Margarita Water District at CustomerCare@smwd.com  or 
call (949)459-6420. Information on lead in drinking water, 
testing methods, and steps you can take to minimize expo -
sure is available at https://www.epa.gov/safewater/lead .
Your Water:  
Always Available, Always Assured
T
he Diemer Water T reatment 
Plant, located in the hills 
above Yorba Linda, processes up 
to 520 million gallons of clean 
water per day—enough to fill 
the Rose Bowl every four hours. 
The water is a blend from the 
Colorado River Aqueduct and the State Water Project. At 212 
acres, it’s one of the largest water treatment plants in the U.S. 
It provides nearly half of Orange County’s total water supply. 
Water flowing from Diemer meets or surpasses all state and 
federal regulations. And it is kept safe from the treatment plant 
to your tap by constant testing throughout the distribution 
network. This constant surveillance ensures your drinking 
water stays within the requirements mandated by the federal 
Safe Drinking Water Act.
Where Can You Learn More?
T
here’s a wealth of information on the internet about 
drinking water quality and water issues in general. Some 
good sites to begin your research are:
• Metropolitan Water District of Southern California: 
mwdh2o.com
• California Department of Water Resources:  
water.ca.gov
• The Water Education Foundation: watereducation.org
T o learn more about Water Conservation & Rebate 
Information:
• http://smwd.com/conservation
And to see the aqueducts in action, check out these two videos:
• Wings Over Water: youtu.be/8A1v1Rr2neU
• Wings Over Metropolitan's Colorado River 
Aqueduct: youtu.be/KipMQh5t0f4
 Lead Service Line Inventory
S
MWD’s lead and copper service line inventory can be 
found at smwd.com/553/Lead-FAQ.
3
Chloramines
I
mported and locally produced drinking water is treated with chloramines, a combination of chlorine and ammonia, as a disinfectant. 
Chloramines effectively eliminate bacteria and other microorganisms that may cause disease. Compared to chlorine alone, 
chloramines last longer in the distribution system, produce fewer disinfection by-products, and have little to no odor when used 
properly.
Precautions
Kidney dialysis patients: Individuals using kidney dialysis machines should consult their health-care provider regarding appropriate 
water treatment.
Fish and aquatic life: Chloramines are toxic to fish and other aquatic organisms. Customers maintaining fish ponds, tanks, or 
aquariums should adjust water treatment methods accordingly.
For more information, visit epa.gov/dwreginfo/chloramines-drinking-water.
Drinking Water Contaminants
The sources of drinking water (both tap water and bottled water) include rivers, lakes, streams, ponds, reservoirs, 
springs, and wells. As water travels over the surface of the land or through the ground, it dissolves naturally occurring 
minerals and, in some cases, radioactive material and can pick up substances resulting from the presence of animals or 
from human activity.
Contaminants that may be present in source water include:
• Microbial contaminants, such as viruses and bacteria, that may come from sewage treatment plants, septic systems, agricultural 
livestock operations, and wildlife.
• Inorganic contaminants, such as salts and metals, that can be naturally occurring or result from urban stormwater runoff, 
industrial or domestic wastewater discharges, oil and gas production, mining, or farming.
• Pesticides and herbicides that may come from a variety of sources such as agriculture, urban stormwater runoff, and residential 
uses.
• Organic chemical contaminants, including synthetic and volatile organic chemicals, that are by-products of industrial processes 
and petroleum production and can also come from gas stations, urban stormwater runoff, agricultural application, and septic 
systems.
• Radioactive contaminants that can be naturally occurring or the result of oil and gas production and mining activities.
T o ensure that tap water is safe to drink, the U.S. EPA and SWRCB prescribe regulations that limit the amount of certain contaminants 
in water provided by public water systems. U.S. Food and Drug Administration regulations and California law also establish limits 
for contaminants in bottled water that provide the same protection for public health. 
Drinking water, including bottled water, may reasonably be expected to contain at least small amounts of some contaminants. The 
presence of contaminants does not necessarily indicate that water poses a health risk. More information about contaminants and 
potential health effects can be obtained by calling the U.S. EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Hotline (1-800-426-4791).
4
Water Conservation: Making Every 
Drop Count
W
ater is a limited natural resource, and using it efficiently 
is essential in both wet and dry years. Outdoor watering 
makes up about 60 percent of home water use, making it the 
biggest opportunity for savings.
Start Outdoors: Use Water Wisely in Your Yard
• Choose water-wise plants and drought-tolerant 
landscaping.
• Adjust sprinklers to avoid watering sidewalks and streets.
• Water in the early morning or late evening to reduce 
evaporation.
• Fix leaks in irrigation systems—a small leak can waste 
thousands of gallons per year.
• Use mulch to retain moisture and keep plants healthy.
• Visit bewaterwise.com for more landscaping ideas and 
rebates.
Indoor Water-Saving Tips
• Take shorter showers—a five-minute shower uses much 
less water than a bath.
• T urn off the tap while brushing your teeth, shaving, or 
washing dishes.
• Fix leaks—a dripping faucet or running toilet can waste 
thousands of gallons per year.
• Run dishwashers and washing machines only when full 
to save up to 1,000 gallons per month.
• Keep a pitcher of drinking water in the refrigerator to 
avoid running the tap for cold water.
Monitor and Manage Your Water Use
Many cities offer online water usage tracking to help residents 
monitor their water consumption in real time. By identifying 
leaks and adjusting usage habits, homeowners can save both 
water and money.
Why Conservation Matters
Southern California’s arid climate and reliance on imported water 
make conservation essential. Water is transported hundreds of 
miles through aqueducts from the Colorado River and Northern 
California, with high costs for pumping and treatment.
Small Actions, Big Impact
By making small changes in daily habits and using water 
more efficiently, we can protect this vital resource for future 
generations.
T o learn more about Water Conservation & Rebate 
Information: http://smwd.com/conservation.
Disinfectants and Disinfection 
By-Products in Drinking Water
D
isinfection of drinking water was one of the greatest pub-
lic health advancements of the 20th century, significantly 
reducing the spread of waterborne diseases caused by bacteria 
and viruses. T oday chlorine and chloramines are commonly 
used disinfectants to ensure safe drinking water.
How Disinfection Works
• Chlorine is added at the water source (groundwater wells 
or treatment plants) to kill harmful microorganisms.
• Residual chlorine remains in the distribution system to 
prevent bacterial growth in the pipes that carry water to 
homes and businesses.
• Chloramines, a combination of chlorine and ammonia, 
are also used as a disinfectant and help reduce certain 
by-products.
Disinfection By-Products and Regulations
While effective, chlorine and chloramines can react with 
naturally occurring materials in water, forming disinfection 
by-products (DBPs), which may pose health risks. The most 
common DBPs are trihalomethanes (THMs) and haloacetic 
acids (HAAs). 
T o protect public health, the U.S. EPA regulates DBPs under 
the Safe Drinking Water Act:
• In 1979 the U.S. EPA set the maximum allowable total 
THM level at 100 parts per billion (ppb).
• In 2002 the Stage 1 Disinfectants/Disinfection 
Byproducts Rule lowered the limit to 80 ppb and added 
HAAs to the list of regulated chemicals.
• In 2006 the Stage 2 Disinfectants/Disinfection 
Byproducts Rule introduced further monitoring and 
control measures. 
• Full compliance began in 2012.
Your drinking water meets or surpasses all state and federal 
standards, with rigorous monitoring in place. We regularly 
test for DBPs and adjust treatment methods to maintain a safe 
balance between disinfection and by-product control.
For more information on water quality and regulations, 
visit:
• U.S. EPA water regulations: epa.gov/sdwa
• SWRCB: waterboards.ca.gov
Your drinking water is treated, tested, and monitored to ensure 
it remains safe and reliable for you and your community.
5
2024 SANTA MARGARITA WATER DISTRICT DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM WATER QUALITY
MCL (MRDL/
MRDLG)
AVERAGE 
AMOUNT
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS
MCL
VIOLATION TYPICAL SOURCE OF CONTAMINANT
Disinfection Byproducts
Total Trihalomethanes (ppb) 80 49 24 - 50 No Byproducts of Chlorine Disinfection
Haloacetic Acids (ppb) 60 22 4.5 - 33 No Byproducts of Chlorine Disinfection
Chlorine Residual (ppm) (4 / 4) 1.6 1.26 - 1.97 No Disinfectant Added for Treatment
Aesthetic Quality
Color (color units) 15* 1 1 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Odor (threshold odor number) 3* 1 1 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Specific Conductance (µmho/cm) 1,600* 1,013 655 - 1,140 No Substances that Forms Ions in Water
Turbidity (NTU) 5* 0.07 0.04 - 0.21 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Total Dissolved Solids (ppm) 1,000* 606 528 - 652 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
 Unregulated Chemicals - Tested in 2024
Alkalinity, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated 110 91 - 126 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated 242 220 - 260 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total (grains/gallon) Not Regulated 14 13 - 15 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
pH (pH units) Not Regulated 8 7.00 - 8.25 n/a Hydrogen Ion Concentration
Sodium (ppm) Not Regulated 97 93 - 99 n/a Salt Present in Water; Naturally Occuring
Eight locations in the distribution system are tested quarterly for total trihalomethanes and haloacetic acids; forty-three locations are tested monthly for color, odor, 
and turbidity, and weekly for coliform bacteria. MRDL = Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level; MRDLG = Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level Goal; *Contaminant is 
regulated by a secondary standard to maintain aesthetic qualities (taste, odor, color).
2024 Santa Margarita Water District Drinking Water Quality
LEAD AND COPPER ACTION LEVELS AT RESIDENTIAL TAPS
ACTION 
LEVEL (AL)
PUBLIC HEALTH
GOAL
90TH PERCENTILE
VALUE
SITES EXCEEDING AL 
/ NUMBER OF SITES
AL
VIOLATION? TYPICAL SOURCE OF CONTAMINANT
Lead (ppb) 15 0.2 ND 0 / 52 No Corrosion of Household Plumbing
Copper (ppm) 1.3 0.3 0.079 0 / 52 No Corrosion of Household Plumbing
Every three years, at least 50 residences are tested for lead and copper at-the-tap.  Santa Margarita Water District tested 52 homes in the most recent set of samples 
collected in 2024.  Lead was not detected in any sample.  Copper was detected in 15 samples; none exceeded the Action Level (AL).  A regulatory action level is the 
concentration of a contaminant which, if exceeded, triggers treatment or other requirements that a water system must follow.
UNREGULATED CHEMICALS REQUIRING MONITORING
CHEMICAL
NOTIFICATION 
LEVEL PHG
AVERAGE 
AMOUNT
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS MOST RECENT SAMPLING DATE
Haloacetic acids (HAA5) (ppb) n/a n/a 7.23 2.73 - 12.8 2020
Haloacetic acids (HAA6Br) (ppb) n/a n/a 5.57 3.82 - 7.38 2020
Haloacetic acids (HAA9) (ppb) n/a n/a 11.7 6.17 - 18.2 2020
MICROBIOLOGICAL MCL MCLG
HIGHEST NUMBER OF 
DETECTIONS
NO. OF MONTHS 
IN VIOLATION TYPICAL SOURCE OF BACTERIA
E. coli (a) 0 0 0 Human and animal fecal waste
(a) Routine and repeat samples are total coliform-positive and either is E. coli-positive or system fails to take repeat samples following E. coli-positive routine sample  or 
system fails to analyze total coliform-positive repeat sample for E. coli.
6
ppb = parts per billion; ppm = parts per million; pCi/L = picoCuries per liter; µmho/cm = micromhos per centimeter; NTU = nephelometric turbidity units; MCL = Maximum 
Contaminant Level;  PHG = California Public Health Goal; MCLG = federal MCL Goal;  MRDL = Maximum Residual Disinfectant Level; MRDLG = Maximum Residual 
Disinfectant Level Goal; NL = Notification Level;  n/a = not applicable; TT = treatment technique. * Chemical is regulated by a secondary standard.
2024 IRVINE RANCH WATER DISTRICT BAKER WATER TREATMENT PLANT
 CHEMICAL MCL PHG
AVERAGE 
AMOUNT
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS
MCL
VIOLATION? TYPICAL SOURCE OF CHEMICAL
 Radiologicals - Tested in 2024
Gross Alpha Particle Activity (pCi/L) 15 MCLG = 0 3.8 3.8 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Gross Beta Particle Activity (pCi/L) 50 MCLG = 0 4.6 4.6 No Decay of Natural and Man-made Deposits
Uranium (pCi/L) 20 0.43 2.2 2.2 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
 Inorganic Chemicals - Tested in 2024
Arsenic (ppb) 10 0.004 2 2 - 2.27 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Barium (ppm) 1 2 0.129 0.113 - 0.141 No Refinery Discharge, Erosion of Natural 
Deposits
Chlorine Dioxide (ppb) MRDL = 800 MRDLG = 800 98.5 ND - 680 No Drinking Water Disinfectant Added for 
Treatment
Chlorite (ppm) 1.0 0.05 ND ND - 0.09 No Byproduct of Drinking Water Chlorination
Fluoride (ppm) 2.0 1 0.35 0.31 - 0.38 No Erosion of Natural Deposits; Water 
Additive for Dental Health
 Secondary Standards* - Tested in 2024
Chloride (ppm) 500* n/a 112 98.4 - 119 No  Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Color (color units) 15* n/a ND ND - 8 No  Naturally-occurring Organic Materials
Manganese (ppb) 50* n/a 1.44 ND - 47 No  Leaching from Natural Deposits
Odor (threshold odor number) 3* n/a 2 ND - 4 No  Naturally-occurring Organic Materials
Specific Conductance (µmho/cm) 1,600* n/a 1,065 1,008 - 1,126 No  Substances that Form Ions in Water
Sulfate (ppm) 500* n/a 237 228 - 243 No  Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Total Dissolved Solids (ppm) 1,000* n/a 642 588 - 712 No  Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Turbidity (NTU) 5* n/a ND ND - 0.3 No  Soil Runoff
 Unregulated Chemicals - Tested in 2024
Alkalinity, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated n/a 124 115 - 144 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Boron (ppm) NL = 1 n/a 0.138 0.127 - 0.153 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Calcium (ppm) Not Regulated n/a 72.7 67.2 - 79.5 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total as CaCO3  (ppm) Not Regulated n/a 295 281 - 313 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total (grains/gallon) Not Regulated n/a 17 16 - 18 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Lithium (ppb) Not Regulated n/a 65.7 64.2 - 67.2 n/a Various Natural and Man-made Sources
Magnesium (ppm) Not Regulated n/a 27.9 26.2 - 29.8 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
pH (pH units) Not Regulated n/a 7.9 7.4 - 8.6 n/a Hydrogen Ion Concentration
Potassium (ppm) Not Regulated n/a 5.9 4.83 - 21.2 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Sodium (ppm) Not Regulated n/a 105 90.3 - 114 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Total Organic Carbon (ppm) TT n/a 1.9 1.9 n/a Various Natural and Man-made Sources
IRVINE RANCH WATER DISTRICT BAKER WATER 
TREATMENT PLANT
TREATMENT 
TECHNIQUE
TURBIDITY 
MEASUREMENTS
TT 
VIOLATION?
TYPICAL SOURCE IN DRINKING 
WATER
Turbidity - combined filter effluent
1) Highest single turbidity measurement (NTU) 0.1 0.043 No Soil Runoff
2) Percentage of samples less than or equal to 0.3 NTU 95% 100% No Soil Runoff
Turbidity is a measure of the cloudiness of the water, an indication of particulate matter, some of which might include harmful microorganisms. Low turbidity in the 
treated water is a good indicator of effective filtration.  Filtration is called a “treatment technique” (TT).  A treatment technique is a required process intended to reduce 
the level of chemicals in drinking water that are difficult and sometimes impossible  to measure directly. NTU = nephelometric turbidity units
7
2024 METROPOLITAN WATER DISTRICT OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA TREATED SURFACE WATER
CONSTITUENT MCL
PHG 
(MCLG) 
AVERAGE 
AMOUNT
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS
MCL 
VIOLATION? TYPICAL SOURCE IN DRINKING WATER
Radiologicals - Tested in 2023 and 2024
Gross Alpha Particle Activity (pCi/L) 15 (0) ND ND - 5 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Gross Beta Particle Activity (pCi/L) 50 (0) 4 ND - 5 No Decay of Natural and Man-made Deposits
Uranium (pCi/L) 20 0.43 1 ND - 3 No Erosion of Natural Deposits
Inorganic Chemicals - Tested in 2024
Aluminum (ppm) 1 0.6 ND ND - 0.11 No Treatment Process Residue, Natural Deposits
Barium (ppm) 1 2 0.124 0.124 No Refinery Discharge, Erosion of Natural Deposits
Bromate (ppb) 10 0.1 ND ND - 1.6 No Byproduct of Drinking Water Ozonation
Fluoride (ppm) 2 1 0.7 0.6 - 0.8 No Water Additive for Dental Health
Secondary Standards* - Tested in 2024
Aluminum (ppb) 200* 600 ND ND - 110 No Treatment Process Residue, Natural Deposits
Chloride (ppm) 500* n/a 104 93 - 116 No Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Color (color units) 15* n/a 2 1 - 2 No Naturally-occurring Organic Materials
Odor (threshold odor number) 3* n/a 1 1 No Naturally-occurring Organic Materials
Specific Conductance (µmho/cm) 1,600* n/a 979 888 - 1,070 No Substances that Form Ions in Water
Sulfate (ppm) 500* n/a 224 196 - 253 No Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Total Dissolved Solids (ppm) 1,000* n/a 621 556 - 686 No Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Unregulated Chemicals - Tested in 2024
Alkalinity, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated n/a 114 105 - 123 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Boron (ppm) NL = 1 n/a 0.14 0.14 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Calcium (ppm) Not Regulated n/a 68 58 - 78 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total as CaCO3 (ppm) Not Regulated n/a 270 235 - 305 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Hardness, total (grains/gal) Not Regulated n/a 16 14 - 18 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Magnesium (ppm) Not Regulated n/a 26 22 - 29 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
pH (pH units) Not Regulated n/a 8.2 8.2 n/a Hydrogen Ion Concentration
Potassium (ppm) Not Regulated n/a 4.9 4.4 - 5.4 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Sodium (ppm) Not Regulated n/a 103 90 - 116 n/a Runoff or Leaching from Natural Deposits
Total Organic Carbon (ppm) TT n/a 2.4 2 - 2.5 n/a Various Natural and Man-made Sources
ppb = parts per billion; ppm = parts per million; pCi/L = picoCuries per liter; µmho/cm = micromhos per centimeter; ND = not detected; MCL = Maximum Contaminant 
Level; (MCLG) = federal  MCL Goal; PHG = California Public Health Goal; NL = Notification Level;  n/a = not applicable; TT = treatment technique.  * Chemical is regulated 
by a secondary standard.
UNREGULATED CHEMICALS REQUIRING MONITORING
CHEMICAL
NOTIFICATION 
LEVEL PHG
AVERAGE 
AMOUNT
RANGE OF 
DETECTIONS MOST RECENT SAMPLING DATE
Lithium (ppb) n/a n/a 45 42 - 50 2024
Manganese (ppb) ** SMCL = 50 n/a 2.2 1.1 - 4.8 2020
 SMCL = Secondary 
** Manganese is regulated with a secondary standard of 50 ppb but was not detected, based on the detection limit for purposes of reporting of 20 ppb.  Manganese 
was MCL included as part of the unregulated chemicals requiring monitoring.
METROPOLITAN WATER DISTRICT  
DIEMER FILTRATION PLANT
TREATMENT 
TECHNIQUE
TURBIDITY 
MEASUREMENTS
TT 
VIOLATION?
TYPICAL SOURCE IN DRINKING 
WATER
Turbidity - combined filter effluent
1) Highest single turbidity measurement (NTU) 0.3 0.06 No Soil Runoff
2) Percentage of samples less than or equal to 0.3 NTU 95% 100% No Soil Runoff
Turbidity is a measure of the cloudiness of the water, an indication of particulate matter, some of which might include harmful microorganisms. Low turbidity in 
Metropolitan’s treated water is a good indicator of effective filtration.  Filtration is called a “treatment technique” (TT).  A treatment technique is a required process 
intended to reduce the level of chemicals in drinking water that are difficult and sometimes impossible  to measure directly. NTU = nephelometric turbidity units
8
Drinking Water Definitions
What are water quality standards? 
Drinking water standards established by U.S. EPA and DDW set limits 
for substances that may affect consumer health or aesthetic qualities of 
drinking water.
The tables in this report show the following types of water quality 
standards:
• Maximum contaminant level (MCL): The highest level of a 
contaminant that is allowed in drinking water. Primary MCLs 
are set as close to the PHGs (or MCLGs) as is economically and 
technologically feasible.
• Maximum residual disinfectant level (MRDL): The highest level of a 
disinfectant allowed in drinking water. There is convincing evidence 
that addition of a disinfectant is necessary for control of microbial 
contaminants.
• Secondary MCLs are set to protect the odor, taste, and appearance 
of drinking water. 
• Primary drinking water standard: MCLs for contaminants that affect 
health, along with their monitoring and reporting requirements and 
water treatment requirements.  
• Regulatory action level (AL): The concentration of a contaminant 
that, if exceeded, triggers treatment or other requirements that a 
water system must follow. 
What is a water quality goal? 
In addition to mandatory water quality standards, U.S. EPA and DDW 
have set voluntary water quality goals for some contaminants. Water 
quality goals are often set at such low levels that they are not achievable 
in practice and are not directly measurable. Nevertheless, these goals 
provide useful guideposts and direction for water management practices.
The tables in this report include three types of water quality goals:
• Maximum contaminant level goal (MCLG): The level of a 
contaminant in drinking water below which there is no known or 
expected risk to health. MCLGs are set by U.S. EPA.
• Maximum residual disinfectant level goal (MRDLG): The level of 
a drinking water disinfectant below which there is no known or 
expected risk to health. MRDLGs do not reflect the benefits of the 
use of disinfectants to control microbial contaminants. 
• Public health goal (PHG): The level of a contaminant in drinking 
water below which there is no known or expected risk to health. 
PHGs are set by the California EPA.  
How are contaminants measured? 
Water is sampled and tested throughout the year. Contaminants are 
measured in:
• Parts per million (ppm) or milligrams per liter (mg/L)
• Parts per billion (ppb) or micrograms per liter (µg/L)
• Parts per trillion (ppt) or nanograms per liter (ng/L)
Source Water Assessments
U
.S. EPA requires water suppliers to complete a source water assessment (SWA) that uses information collected in the watershed sani-
tary surveys. MWDSC completed its SWA in December 2002. The most recent SWA for IRWD’s Santiago Reservoir was completed 
in 2001. The SWA is used to evaluate the vulnerability of water sources to contamination and helps determine whether more protective 
measures are needed.
Every five years, water suppliers are required by DDW to examine possible sources of drinking water contamination in their water 
sources. The watershed sanitary survey for MWDSC’s Colorado River supply was recently updated in 2020; the survey for the State 
Water Project supply was updated in 2021. The IRWD’s watershed sanitary survey for Santiago Reservoir (Irvine Lake) was updated 
in 2019. Water from the Colorado River is considered to be most vulnerable to contamination from recreation, urban/stormwater 
runoff, increasing urbanization in the watershed, and wastewater. Water supplies from Northern California’s State Water Project are 
most vulnerable to contamination from urban/stormwater runoff, wildlife, agriculture, recreation, and wastewater. Water supplies 
from the Santiago Reservoir are most vulnerable to contamination from septic systems and wildfires. Copies of the most recent 
summary of the watershed sanitary surveys or the SWAs can be obtained by calling SMWD Customer Care at (949) 459-6420.
9
Have you ever wondered where your water comes from? Here 
in Santa Margarita Water District, our water is surface water 
imported by the MWDSC and IRWD. MWDSC’s imported 
water sources are the Colorado River and the State Water Project, 
which draws water from the Sacramento-San Joaquin River 
Delta. Water from Northern California travels to us through a 
complex delivery system known as the California State Water 
Project. Designed and built in the 1960s, the State Water 
Project is one of the largest public water and power utilities in 
the world, providing drinking water for more than 25 million 
people statewide. Managed by the California Department of 
Water Resources, the project stretches over 700 miles from 
Lake Oroville in the north to Lake Perris in the south. Water 
stored in Lake Oroville, Folsom Lake, and other tributaries and 
fed by snowmelt from the Sierra Nevada Mountains flows into 
the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers, and from there into 
reservoirs in the Bay-Delta region. From the Bay-Delta, giant 
pumps lift the water into the 444-mile-long California Aqueduct, 
from which it flows southward to cities and farms in Central 
and Southern California. Composed mainly of concrete-lined 
canals, the aqueduct includes over 20 miles of tunnels, over 
130 miles of pipelines, and 27 miles of siphons. Along 
the way, the water is pumped 2,882 feet over the 
T ehachapi Mountains. The Edmonston Pumping 
Plant alone lifts millions of gallons a day up 
1,926 feet, the highest single water lift in 
the world. Is it any wonder the State 
Water Project is the largest single 
consumer of power in California? Managed by the MWDSC, 
the Colorado River 
Aqueduct begins near Parker 
Dam on the Colorado River. 
There, the Gene Pumping 
Station lifts the water over 300 
feet as it begins its 242-mile 
journey to Lake Mathews, 
just outside the City of 
Corona. Along the way, the 
water passes through two 
reservoirs, five pumping 
stations, 62 miles of canals, 
and 176 miles of tunnels, 
buried conduits, and 
siphons. All told, the water 
is lifted four times, for a 
total of more than 1,300 feet. 
After its journey across the Mojave Desert, the water descends 
into the Coachella Valley and through the San Gorgonio 
Pass. Near Cabazon, the aqueduct flows underground, passing 
beneath the San Jacinto Mountains and continuing until it reaches 
its terminus at Lake Mathews. From there, 156 miles of distribution 
lines, along with eight more tunnels and five drinking water treatment 
plants, deliver treated water throughout Southern California.
Where Does Our Water Comes From? And How Does it Get to Us?
10
Drinking Water Fluoridation
F
luoride has been added to U.S. drinking water supplies since 1945 to help prevent tooth decay. As of today, the majority 
of public water suppliers in the country, including the MWDSC, fluoridate their water. MWDSC began adding fluo -
ride in December 2007, complying with all provisions of California’s fluoridation system requirements. Fluoride levels in 
drinking water are regulated in California and limited to a maximum of 2 parts per million (ppm). Some local groundwater 
supplies naturally contain fluoride, but they are not supplemented with additional fluoride.
Additional Information
For more details on water fluoridation, please visit:
• U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC):  cdc.gov/fluoridation or (800) 232-4636
• State Water Resources Control Board, Division of Drinking Water:  waterboards.ca.gov/drinking_water/certlic/
drinkingwater/Fluoridation.html
• American Dental Association:  ada.org
• American Water Works Association:  awwa.org
For specific inquiries about MWDSC’s fluoridation program, please contact MWDSC directly at (800) 225-5693.
Santa Margarita Water District
26111 Antonio Parkway 
Rancho Santa Margarita, CA 92688
(949) 459-6420 • smwd.com
T otal Dissolved Solids, Alkalinity, and Hardness
T
otal dissolved solids (TDS) are an indicator of the aesthetic characteristics of drinking water and a 
gauge of a broad array of chemical constituents within the water. It is a measure of all the com -
bined inorganic and organic substances, and while it is not associated with any health effects, TDS 
can impact the appearance and taste of water.
TDS is mainly inorganic salts, as well as a small amount of organic matter. Common 
inorganic salts found in water include calcium, magnesium, potassium and sodium, along 
with nitrates, chlorides, and sulfates. These minerals originate from a variety of sources, 
both natural and caused by human activity.
Alone, dissolved solids are usually not a health hazard. Some people buy mineral water, 
which has naturally elevated levels of dissolved solids. The U.S. EPA includes TDS as 
a secondary standard, a voluntary guideline for aesthetic and cosmetic effects. Kept 
within the established guidelines, TDS can impart a favorable taste to water. T oo little 
can give water a flat taste. There are issues, however, with high levels of TDS. Increased 
TDS concentrations can produce hard water, which stains household fixtures, corrodes 
pipes, and imparts a metallic taste. Within the SMWD system, you can be assured that 
TDS is kept well within the State of California’s established secondary standard.
T otal  
Dissolved Solids
Average Amount: 606 mg/L
Range: 528-652 mg/L
Alkalinity
Average Amount: 100 mg/L
Range: 91-126 mg/L
Hardness
Average Amount: 242 mg/L
Range: 220-260 mg/L
11
